# 83. The True *Guru*


>The true <span style="font-style:normal">guru</span> will never humiliate 
you, nor will he estrange you from yourself. He will constantly bring you back 
to the fact of your inherent perfection and encourage you to seek within.

**Questioner:**&ensp;You were saying the other day that at the root of your 
realisation was the trust in your <span data-tippy-content="Spiritual teacher, 
preceptor.">guru</span>. He assured you that you were already the Absolute 
Reality and there was nothing more to be done. You trusted him and left it at 
that, without straining, without striving. Now, my question is, without trust 
in your *guru* would you have realised? After all, what you are, you are 
whether your mind trusts or not; would doubt obstruct the action of the 
*guru*’s words and make them inoperative?

**Maharaj:**&ensp;You have said it — they would have been made inoperative — 
for a time.

**Q:**&ensp;And what would happen to the energy or power in the *guru*’s words?

**M:**&ensp;It would remain latent, unmanifested. But the entire question is 
based on a misunderstanding. The master, the disciple, the love and trust 
between them — these are one fact, not so many independent facts. Each is a 
part of the other. Without love and trust there would have been no *guru* nor 
disciple, and no relationship between them. It is like pressing a switch to 
light an electric lamp. It is because the lamp, the wiring, the switch, the 
transformer, the transmission lines and the power house, form a single whole 
that you get the light. Any one factor missing and there would be no light. 
You must not separate the inseparable. Words do not create facts; they either 
describe them or distort. The fact is always non-verbal.

**Q:**&ensp;I still do not understand — can the *guru*’s word remain 
unfulfilled or will it invariably prove true?

**M:**&ensp;Words of a realised man never miss their purpose. They wait for 
the right conditions to arise, which may take some time; and this is natural, 
for there is a season for sowing and a season for harvesting. But the word of 
a *guru* is a seed that cannot perish. Of course, the *guru* must be a real 
one who is beyond the body and the mind, beyond consciousness itself, beyond 
space and time, beyond duality and unity, beyond understanding and 
description. The good people who have read a lot and have a lot to say may 
teach you many useful things, but they are not the real *guru*s whose words 
invariably come true. They also may tell you that you are the ultimate reality 
itself, but what of it?

**Q:**&ensp;Nevertheless, if for some reason I happen to trust them and obey, 
shall I be the loser?

**M:**&ensp;If you are able to trust and obey, you will soon find your real 
*guru*, or, rather, he will find you.

**Q:**&ensp;Does every knower of the Self become a *guru*, or can one be a 
knower of Reality without being able to take others to it?

**M:**&ensp;If you know what you teach, you can teach what you know. Here 
seership and teachership are one. But the Absolute Reality is beyond both. The 
self-styled *guru*s talk of ripeness and effort, of merits and achievements, 
of destiny and grace; all these are mere mental formations, projections of an 
addicted mind. Instead of helping, they obstruct.

**Q:**&ensp;How can I make out whom to follow and whom to mistrust?

**M:**&ensp;Mistrust all until you are convinced. The true *guru* will never 
humiliate you, nor will he estrange you from yourself. He will constantly 
bring you back to the fact of your inherent perfection and encourage you to 
seek within. He knows you need nothing, not even him, and is never tired of 
reminding you. But the self appointed *guru* is more concerned with himself 
than with his disciples.

**Q:**&ensp;You said that reality is beyond the knowledge and the teaching of 
the real. Is not the knowledge of reality the supreme itself and teaching the 
proof of its attainment?

**M:**&ensp;The knowledge of the real or the self is a state of mind. Teaching 
another is a movement in duality. They concern the mind only; <span 
data-tippy-content="Being, existence, true essence. In <em>yoga</em> the 
quality of purity or goodness.">sattva</span> is a <span 
data-tippy-content="Attributes, qualities. In <em>Samkhya</em> philosophy the 
three attributes of the cosmic substance (<em>prakriti</em>) are: illuminating 
(<em>sattva</em>), activating (<em>rajas</em>) and restraining 
(<em>tamas</em>).">guna</span> all the same.

**Q:**&ensp;What is real then?

**M:**&ensp;He who knows the mind as non-realised and realised, who knows 
ignorance and knowledge as states of mind, he is the real. When you are given 
diamonds mixed with gravel, you may either miss the diamonds or find them. It 
is the seeing that matters. Where is the greyness of the gravel and the beauty 
of the diamond, without the power to see? The known is but a shape and 
knowledge is but a name. The knower is but a state of mind. The real is beyond.

**Q:**&ensp;Surely, objective knowledge and ideas of things and self-knowledge 
are not one and the same thing. One needs a brain, the other does not.

**M:**&ensp;For the purpose of discussion you can arrange words and give them 
meaning, but the fact remains that all knowledge is a form of ignorance. The 
most accurate map is yet only paper. All knowledge is in memory; it is only 
recognition, while reality is beyond the duality of the knower and the known.

**Q:**&ensp;Then by what is reality known?

**M:**&ensp;How misleading is your language! You assume, unconsciously, that 
reality also is approachable through knowledge. And then you will bring in a 
knower of reality beyond reality! Do understand that to *be*, reality need not 
be known. Ignorance and knowledge are in the mind, not in the real.

**Q:**&ensp;If there is no such thing as the knowledge of the real, then how 
do I reach it? 

**M:**&ensp;You need not reach out for what is already with you. Your very 
reaching out makes you miss it. Give up the idea that you have not found it 
and just let it come into the focus of direct perception, here and now, by 
removing all that is of the mind.

**Q:**&ensp;When all that can go goes, what remains?

**M:**&ensp;Emptiness remains, awareness remains, pure light of the conscious 
being remains. It is like asking what remains of a room when all the furniture 
is removed. A most serviceable room remains. And when even the walls are 
pulled down, space remains. Beyond space and time is the *here* and the *now* 
of reality.

**Q:**&ensp;Does the witness remain?

**M:**&ensp;As long as there is consciousness, its witness is also there. The 
two appear and disappear together.

**Q:**&ensp;If the witness too is transient, why is he given so much 
importance?

**M:**&ensp;Just to break the spell of the known, the illusion that only the 
perceivable is real.

**Q:**&ensp;Perception is primary, the witness is secondary.

**M:**&ensp;This is the heart of the matter. As long as you believe that only 
the outer world is real, you remain its slave. To become free, your attention 
must be drawn to the “I Am”, the witness. Of course, the knower and the known 
are one, not two; but to break the spell of the known, the knower must be 
brought to the forefront. Neither is primary; both are reflections in memory 
of the ineffable experience, ever-new and ever-now, untranslatable, quicker 
than the mind.

**Q:**&ensp;Sir, I am a humble seeker, wandering from *guru* to *guru* in 
search of release. My mind is sick, burning with desire, frozen with fear. My 
days flit by, red with pain, grey with boredom. My age is advancing, my health 
decaying, my future dark and frightening. At this rate, I shall live in sorrow 
and die in despair. Is there any hope for me? Or have I come too late?

**M:**&ensp;Nothing is wrong with you, but the ideas you have of yourself are 
altogether wrong. It is not you who desires, fears and suffers, it is the 
person built on the foundation of your body by circumstances and influences. 
You are not that person. This must be clearly established in your mind and 
never lost sight of. Normally, it needs a prolonged <span 
data-tippy-content="The practice which produces success, 
<em>siddhi</em>.">sadhana</span>, years of austerities and meditation.

**Q:**&ensp;My mind is weak and vacillating. I have neither the strength nor 
the tenacity for *sadhana*s. My case is hopeless.

**M:**&ensp;In a way yours is a most hopeful case. There is an alternative to 
*sadhana*, which is trust. If you cannot have the conviction born from 
fruitful search, then take advantage of my discovery, which I am so eager to 
share with you. I can see with the utmost clarity that you have never been, 
nor are, nor will be, estranged from realty, that you are the fullness of 
perfection here and now and that nothing can deprive you of your heritage, of 
what you are. You are in no way different from me, only you do not know it. 
You do not know what you are and therefore you imagine yourself to be what you 
are not. Hence your desires and fear and overwhelming despair. And meaningless 
activity in order to escape. 

Just trust me and live by trusting me. I shall not mislead you. You are the 
Supreme Reality beyond the world and its creator, beyond consciousness and its 
witness, beyond all assertions and denials. Remember it, think of it, act on 
it. Abandon all sense of separation, see yourself in all and act accordingly. 
With action, bliss will come and, with bliss, conviction. After all, you doubt 
yourself because you are in sorrow. Happiness, natural, spontaneous and 
lasting, cannot be imagined. Either it is there or it is not. Once you begin 
to experience the peace, love and happiness which need no outer causes, all 
your doubts will dissolve. Just catch hold of what I told you and live by it.

**Q:**&ensp;You are telling me to live by memory?

**M:**&ensp;You are living by memory anyhow. I am merely asking you to replace 
the old memories by the memory of what I told you. As you were acting on your 
old memories, act on the new one. Don’t be afraid. For some time, there is 
bound to be a conflict between the old and the new, but if you put yourself 
resolutely on the side of the new, the strife will soon come to an end and you 
will realise the effortless state of being oneself, of not being deceived by 
desires and fears born of illusion.

**Q:**&ensp;Many *guru*s have the habit of giving tokens of their grace — 
their head cloth, sticks, begging bowl, or robe, thus transmitting or 
confirming the self-realisation of their disciples. I can see no value in such 
practices. It is not self-realisation that is transmitted, but 
self-importance. Of what earthly use is being told something very flattering, 
but not true? On one hand you are warning me against the many self-styled 
*guru*s; on the other you want me to trust you. Why do you claim to be an 
exception?

**M:**&ensp;I do not ask you to trust *me*. Trust my words and remember them, 
I want your happiness, not mine. Distrust those who put a distance between you 
and your true being and offer themselves as a go-between. I do nothing of the 
kind. I do not even make any promises. I merely say: If you trust my words and 
put them to test, you will discover for yourself how absolutely true they are. 
If you ask for a proof before you venture, I can only say: I am the proof. I 
did trust my teacher’s words and kept them in my mind and I did find that he 
was right; that I was, am, and shall be the Infinite Reality, embracing all, 
transcending all. 

As you say, you have neither the time nor the energy for lengthy practices. I 
offer you an alternative. Accept my words on trust and live anew, or live and 
die in sorrow.

**Q:**&ensp;It seems too good to be true.

**M:**&ensp;Don’t be misled by the simplicity of the advice. Very few are 
those who have the courage to trust the innocent and the simple. To know that 
you are a prisoner of your mind, that you live in an imaginary world of your 
own creation, is the dawn of wisdom. To want nothing of it, to be ready to 
abandon it entirely, is earnestness. Only such earnestness, born of true 
despair, will make you trust me.

**Q:**&ensp;Have I not suffered enough?

**M:**&ensp;Suffering has made you dull, unable to see its enormity. Your 
first task is to see the sorrow in you and around you; your next to long 
intensely for liberation. The very intensity of longing will guide you; you 
need no other guide.

**Q:**&ensp;Suffering has made me dull, indifferent even to itself.

**M:**&ensp;Maybe it is not sorrow but pleasure that made you dull. 
Investigate.

**Q:**&ensp;Whatever may be the cause; I am dull. I have neither the will nor 
the energy.

**M:**&ensp;Oh, no. You have enough for the first step. And each step will 
generate enough energy for the next. Energy comes with confidence and 
confidence comes with experience.

**Q:**&ensp;Is it right to change *guru*s?

**M:**&ensp;Why not change? *Guru*s are like milestones. It is natural to move 
on from one to another. Each tells you the direction and the distance, while 
the <span data-tippy-content="The true spiritual teacher.">sadguru</span>, the 
eternal *guru*, is the road itself. Once you realise that the road is the goal 
and that you are always on the road, not to reach a goal, but to enjoy its 
beauty and its wisdom, life ceases to be a task and becomes natural and 
simple, in itself an ecstasy.

**Q:**&ensp;So, there is no need to worship, to pray, to practice <span 
data-tippy-content="One of the six systems of the Hindu philosophy (from 
<em>yoj</em>, to yoke or join). <em>Yoga</em> teaches the means by which the 
individual spirit (<em>jivatma</em>) can be joined or united with the 
universal spirit (<em>Paramatma</em>).">yoga</span>?

**M:**&ensp;A little of daily sweeping, washing and bathing can do no harm. 
Self-awareness tells you at every step what needs be done. When all is done, 
the mind remains quiet. 

Now you are in the waking state, a person with name and shape, joys and 
sorrows. The person was not there before you were born, nor will be there 
after you die. Instead of struggling with the person to make it become what it 
is not, why not go beyond the waking state and leave the personal life 
altogether? It does not mean the extinction of the person; it means only 
seeing it in right perspective.

**Q:**&ensp;One more question: You said that before I was born I was one with 
the pure being of reality; if so, who decided that I should be born?

**M:**&ensp;In reality, you were never born and never shall die. But now you 
imagine that you are, or have, a body and you ask what has brought about this 
state. Within the limits of illusion, the answer is: Desire born from memory 
attracts you to a body and makes you think as one with it. But this is true 
only from the relative point of view. In fact, there is no body, nor a world 
to contain it; there is only a mental condition, a dream-like state, easy to 
dispel by questioning its reality.

**Q:**&ensp;After you die, will you come again? If I live long enough, will I 
meet you again?

**M:**&ensp;To you, the body is real; to me, there is none. I, as you see me, 
exist in your imagination only. Surely, you will see me again if and when you 
need me. It does not affect me, as the sun is not affected by sunrises and 
sunsets. Because it is not affected, it is certain to be there when needed. 

You are bent on knowledge; I am not. I do not have that sense of insecurity 
that makes you crave to know. I am curious, like a child is curious. But there 
is no anxiety to make me seek refuge in knowledge. Therefore, I am not 
concerned whether I shall be reborn or how long will the world last. These are 
questions born of fear.


<script>
export default {
  props: ["slot-key"],
  mounted () {
    tippy("[data-tippy-content]", {allowHTML: true});
  }
}
</script>

