# 30. You are Free NOW

>You are free NOW. What is it that you want to desire? Desire it. … You are 
the infinite potentiality, the inexhaustible possibility. Because you <span 
style=font-style:normal>are</span>, all can be. The universe is but a partial 
manifestation of your limitless capacity to <span 
style=font-style:normal>become</span>.

**Questioner:**&ensp;There are so many theories about the nature of man and 
universe. The creation theory, the illusion theory, the dream theory — any 
number of them. Which is true?

**Maharaj:**&ensp;All are true, all are false. You can pick up whichever you 
like best.

**Q:**&ensp;You seem to favour the dream theory.

**M:**&ensp;These are all ways of putting words together. Some favour one way, 
some favour another. Theories are neither right nor wrong. They are attempts 
at explaining the inexplicable. It is not the theory that matters, but the way 
it is being tested. It is the testing of the theory that makes it fruitful. 
Experiment with any theory you like — if you are truly earnest and honest, the 
attainment of reality will be yours. As a living being you are caught in an 
untenable and painful situation and you are seeking a way out. You are being 
offered several plans of your prison, none quite true. But they all are of 
some value, only if you are in dead earnest. It is the earnestness that 
liberates and not the theory.

**Q:**&ensp;Theory may be misleading and earnestness, blind.

**M:**&ensp;Your sincerity will guide you. Devotion to the goal of freedom and 
perfection will make you abandon all theories and systems and live by wisdom, 
intelligence and active love. Theories may be good as starting points, but must 
be abandoned, the sooner the better.

**Q:**&ensp;There is a <span data-tippy-content="One who practices 
<em>yoga</em>.">yogi</span> who says that for realisation the eightfold 
<span data-tippy-content="One of the six systems of the Hindu philosophy (from 
<em>yoj</em>, to yoke or join). <em>yoga</em> teaches the means by which the 
individual spirit (<em>jivatma</em>) can be joined or united with the 
universal spirit (<em>Paramatma</em>).">yoga</span> is not necessary; that 
will-power alone will do. It is enough to concentrate on the goal with full 
confidence in the power of pure will to obtain effortlessly and quickly what 
others take decades to achieve.

**M:**&ensp;Concentration, full confidence, pure will! With such assets no 
wonder one attains in no time. This *yoga* of will is all right for the mature 
seeker, who has shed all desires but one. After all, what is will but 
steadiness of heart and mind? Given such steadfastness all can be achieved.

**Q:**&ensp;I feel the *yogi* did not mean mere steadiness of purpose, 
resulting in ceaseless pursuit and application. He meant that with will fixed 
on the goal no pursuit or application is needed. The mere fact of willing 
attracts its object.

**M:**&ensp;Whatever name you give it — will, steady purpose or 
one-pointedness of the mind — you come back to earnestness, sincerity, 
honesty. When you are in dead earnest, you bend every incident, every second 
of your life to your purpose. You do not waste time and energy on other 
things. You are totally dedicated, call it will, love or plain honesty. We are 
complex beings, at war within and without. We contradict ourselves all the 
time, undoing today the work of yesterday. No wonder we are stuck. A little 
integrity would make a lot of difference.

**Q:**&ensp;What is more powerful, desire or destiny?

**M:**&ensp;Desire shapes destiny.

**Q:**&ensp;And destiny shapes desire. My desires are conditioned by heredity 
and circumstances, by opportunities and accidents, by what we call destiny.

**M:**&ensp;Yes, you may say so.

**Q:**&ensp;At what point am I free to desire what I want to desire?

**M:**&ensp;You are free *now*. What is it that you want to desire? Desire it.

**Q:**&ensp;Of course I am free to desire, but I am not free to act on my 
desire. Other urges will lead me astray. My desire is not strong enough, even 
if it has my approval. Other desires, which I disapprove of, are stronger.

**M:**&ensp;Maybe you are deceiving yourself. Maybe you are giving expression 
to your real desires and the ones you approve of are kept on the surface for 
the sake of respectability.

**Q:**&ensp;It may be as you say, but this is another theory. The fact is that 
I do not feel free to desire what I think I should, and when I seem to desire 
rightly, I do not act accordingly.

**M:**&ensp;It is all due to weakness of the mind and disintegration of the 
brain. Collect and strengthen your mind and you will find that your thoughts 
and feelings, words and actions will align themselves in the direction of 
your will.

**Q:**&ensp;Again a counsel of perfection! To integrate and strengthen the 
mind is not an easy task! How does one begin?

**M:**&ensp;You can start only from where you are. You are here and now, you 
cannot get out of here and now.

**Q:**&ensp;But what *can* I do here and now?

**M:**&ensp;You can be aware of your being — here and now.

**Q:**&ensp;That is all?

**M:**&ensp;That is all. There is nothing more to it.

**Q:**&ensp;All my waking and dreaming I am conscious of myself. It does not 
help me much.

**M:**&ensp;You were aware of thinking, feeling, doing. You were not aware of 
your *being*.

**Q:**&ensp;What is the new factor you want me to bring in?

**M:**&ensp;The attitude of pure witnessing, of watching the events without 
taking part in them.

**Q:**&ensp;What will it do to me?

**M:**&ensp;Weak-mindedness is due to lack of intelligence, of understanding, 
which again is the result of non-awareness. By striving for awareness you 
bring your mind together and strengthen it.

**Q:**&ensp;I may be fully aware of what is going on, and yet quite unable to 
influence it in any way.

**M:**&ensp;You are mistaken. What is going on is a projection of your mind. A 
weak mind cannot control its own projections. Be aware, therefore, of your 
mind and its projections. You cannot control what you do not know. On the 
other hand, knowledge gives power. In practice it is very simple. To control 
yourself — know yourself.

**Q:**&ensp;Maybe, I can come to control myself, but shall I be able to deal 
with the chaos in the world?

**M:**&ensp;There is no chaos in the world, except the chaos which your mind 
creates. It is self-created in the sense that at its very centre is the false 
idea of oneself as a thing different and separate from other things. In 
reality you are not a thing, nor are you separate. You are the infinite 
potentiality, the inexhaustible possibility. Because you *are*, all can be. 
The universe is but a partial manifestation of your limitless capacity to 
*become*.

**Q:**&ensp;I find that I am totally motivated by desire for pleasure and fear 
of pain. However noble my desire and justified my fear, pleasure and pain are 
the two poles between which my life oscillates.

**M:**&ensp;Go to the source of both pain and pleasure, of desire and fear. 
Observe, investigate, try to understand.

**Q:**&ensp;Desire and fear both are feelings caused by physical or mental 
factors. They are there, easily observable. But why are they there? Why do I 
desire pleasure and fear pain?

**M:**&ensp;Pleasure and pain are states of mind. As long as you think you are 
the mind or, rather, the body–mind, you are bound to raise such questions.

**Q:**&ensp;And when I realise that I am not the body, shall I be free from 
desire and fear?

**M:**&ensp;As long as there is a body and a mind to protect the body, 
attractions and repulsions will operate. They will be there, out in the field 
of events, but will not concern you. The focus of your attention will be 
elsewhere. You will not be distracted.

**Q:**&ensp;Still they will be there. Will one never be completely free?

**M:**&ensp;You are completely free even now. What you call destiny (<span 
data-tippy-content="Action or “the fruits of action”. <em>Karma</em> is of 
three kinds: <em>sanchita</em> (accumulated from previous births), 
<em>prarabdha</em> (portion of the past <em>karma</em> to be worked out in the 
present life) and <em>agami</em> (the current <em>karma</em> the result of 
which will fructify in future).">karma</span>) is but the result of your own 
will to live. How strong this will is you can judge by the universal horror of 
death.

**Q:**&ensp;People die willingly quite often.

**M:**&ensp;Only when the alternative is worse than death. But such readiness 
to die flows from the same source as the will to live, a source deeper even 
than life itself. To be a living being is not the ultimate state; there is 
something beyond, much more wonderful, which is neither being nor non-being, 
neither living nor non-living. It is a state of pure awareness, beyond the 
limitations of space and time. Once the illusion that the body–mind is oneself 
is abandoned, death loses its terror; it becomes a part of living.

<script>
export default {
  props: ["slot-key"],
  mounted () {
    tippy("[data-tippy-content]", {allowHTML: true});
  }
}
</script>