# 51. Be Indifferent to Pain and Pleasure

>Be indifferent to pain and pleasure, neither asking nor refusing, give all 
your attention to the level on which ‘I am’ is timelessly present. Soon you 
will realise that peace and happiness are in your very nature and it is only 
seeking them through some particular channels that disturbs.

**Questioner:**&ensp;I am a Frenchman by birth and domicile and since about 
ten years I have been practicing <span data-tippy-content="One of the six 
systems of the Hindu philosophy (from <em>yoj</em>, to yoke or join). 
<em>Yoga</em> teaches the means by which the individual spirit 
(<em>jivatma</em>) can be joined or united with the universal spirit 
(<em>Paramatma</em>).">yoga</span>.

**Maharaj:**&ensp;After ten years of work, are you anywhere nearer your goal?

**Q:**&ensp;A little nearer, maybe. It is hard work, you know.

**M:**&ensp;The Self is near and the way to it is easy. All that needs doing 
is doing nothing.

**Q:**&ensp;Yet I found my <span data-tippy-content="The practice which 
produces success, <em>siddhi</em>.">sadhana</span> very difficult.

**M:**&ensp;Your *sadhana* is to *be*. The doing happens. Just be watchful. 
Where is the difficulty in remembering that you are? Your *are* all the time.

**Q:**&ensp;The sense of being is there all the time — no doubt. But the field 
of attention is often overrun by all sorts of mental events — emotions, 
images, ideas. The pure sense of being is usually crowded out.

**M:**&ensp;What is your procedure for clearing the mind of the unnecessary? 
What are your means, your tools for the purification of the mind?

**Q:**&ensp;Basically, man is afraid. He is afraid of himself most. I feel I 
am like a man who is carrying a bomb that is going to explode. He cannot 
defuse it; he cannot throw it away. He is terribly frightened and is searching 
frantically for a solution which he cannot find. To me, liberation is getting 
rid of this bomb. I do not know much about the bomb. I only know that it comes 
from early childhood. I feel like the frightened child protesting passionately 
against not being loved. The child is craving for love and because he does 
not get it, he is afraid and angry. Sometimes I feel like killing somebody or 
myself. This desire is so strong that I am constantly afraid. And I do not 
know how to get free from fear. 

You see, there is a difference between a Hindu mind and a European mind. The 
Hindu mind is comparatively simple. The European is a much more complex being. 
The Hindu is basically <span data-tippy-content="Being, existence, true 
essence. In <em>yoga</em> the quality of purity or goodness; <em>sattvic</em> 
— pure, true.">sattv</span>ic. He does not understand the European’s 
restlessness, his tireless pursuit of what he thinks needs be done, his 
greater general knowledge.

**M:**&ensp;His reasoning capacity is so great that he will reason himself out 
of all reason! His self-assertiveness is due to his reliance on logic.

**Q:**&ensp;But thinking, reasoning, is the mind’s normal state. The mind just 
cannot stop working.

**M:**&ensp;It may be the habitual state, but it need not be the normal state. 
A normal state cannot be painful while a habit often leads to chronic pain.

**Q:**&ensp;If it is not the natural or normal state of mind, then how does 
one stop it? There must be a way to quiet the mind. How often I tell myself, 
“Enough, please stop this endless chatter of sentences repeated round and 
round!”. But my mind would not stop. I feel that one can stop it for a while, 
but not for long. Even the so-called ‘spiritual’ people use tricks to keep 
their mind quiet. They repeat formulas, sing, pray, breathe forcibly or 
gently, shake, rotate, concentrate, meditate, chase trances, cultivate virtues 
— working all the time, in order to cease working, cease chasing, cease 
moving. Were it not so tragic, it would be ridiculous.

**M:**&ensp;The mind exists in two states: as water and as honey. The water 
vibrates at the least disturbance, while the honey, however disturbed, returns 
quickly to immobility.

**Q:**&ensp;By its very nature, the mind is restless. It can perhaps be made 
quiet, but it is not quiet by itself.

**M:**&ensp;You may have chronic fever and shiver all the time. It is desires 
and fears that make the mind restless. Free from all negative emotions, it is 
quiet.

**Q:**&ensp;You cannot protect the child from negative emotions. As soon as it 
is born it learns pain and fear. Hunger is a cruel master and it teaches 
dependence and hate. The child loves the mother because she feeds it and hates 
her because she is late with food. Our unconscious mind is full of conflicts 
which overflow into the conscious. We live on a volcano; we are always in 
danger. I agree that the company of people whose mind is peaceful has a very 
soothing affect, but as soon as I am away from them, the old trouble starts. 
This is why I come periodically to India to seek the company of my <span 
data-tippy-content="Spiritual teacher, preceptor.">guru</span>.

**M:**&ensp;You think you are coming and going, passing through various states 
and moods. I see things as they are: momentary events, presenting themselves 
to me in rapid succession, deriving their being from me, yet definitely 
neither me nor mine. Among phenomena I am not one, nor am I subject to any. I 
am independent so simply and totally that your mind, accustomed to opposition 
and denial, cannot grasp it. I mean literally what I say: I do not need to 
oppose or deny because it is clear to me that I cannot be the opposite or 
denial of anything. I am just beyond, in a different dimension altogether. Do 
not look for me in identification with or opposition to something — I am 
where desire and fear are not. Now, what is your experience? Do you also feel 
that you stand totally aloof from all transient things?

**Q:**&ensp;Yes, I do — occasionally. But at once a sense of danger sets in 
and I feel isolated, outside all relationship with others. You see, here lies 
the difference in our mentalities: With the Hindu, the emotion follows the 
thought. Give a Hindu an idea and his emotions are roused. With the Westerner 
it is the opposite: give him an emotion and he will produce an idea. Your 
ideas are very attractive — intellectually, but emotionally I do not respond.

**M:**&ensp;Set your intellect aside. Don’t use it in these matters.

**Q:**&ensp;Of what use is an advice which I cannot carry out? These are all 
ideas and you want me to respond feelingly to ideas, for without feelings 
there can be no action.

**M:**&ensp;Why do you talk of action? Are you ever acting? Some unknown power 
acts and you imagine that you are acting. You are merely watching what happens 
without being able to influence it in any way.

**Q:**&ensp;Why is there such a tremendous resistance in me against accepting 
that I just can do nothing?

**M:**&ensp;But what can you do? You are like a patient under anaesthetics on 
whom a surgeon performs an operation. When you wake up you find the operation 
over; can you say you have done something?

**Q:**&ensp;But it is me who has chosen to submit to an operation.

**M:**&ensp;Certainly not. It is your illness on one side and the pressure of 
your physician and family on the other that have made you decide. You have no 
choice, only the illusion of it.

**Q:**&ensp;Yet I feel I am not as helpless as you make me appear. I feel I 
can do everything I can think of, only I do not know how. It is not the power 
I lack, but the knowledge.

**M:**&ensp;Not knowing the means is admittedly as bad as not having the 
power! But let us drop the subject for the moment; after all, it is not 
important why we feel helpless, as long as we see clearly that for the time 
being we are helpless. 

I am now seventy-four years old. And yet I feel that I am an infant. I feel 
clearly that, in spite of all the changes, I am a child. My *guru* told me, 
“That child, which is you even now, is your real self” (<span 
data-tippy-content="One’s own form, nature, character.">svarupa</span>)”. Go 
back to that state of pure being where the ‘I am’ is still in its purity, 
before it became contaminated with ‘this I am’ or ‘that I am’. Your burden is 
of false self-identifications — abandon them all. My *guru* told me, “Trust 
me. I tell you: You are divine. Take it as the absolute truth. Your joy is 
divine, your suffering is divine, too. All comes from God. Remember it always. 
You are God; your will alone is done”. I did believe him and soon realised how 
wonderfully true and accurate his words were. I did not condition my mind by 
thinking, “I am God”, “I am wonderful”, “I am beyond”. I simply followed his 
instruction, which was to focus the mind on pure being, ‘I am’, and stay in 
it. I used to sit for hours together with nothing but the ‘I am’ in my mind, 
and soon peace and joy and a deep all-embracing love became my normal state. 
In it all disappeared: myself, my *guru*, the life I lived, the world around 
me. Only peace and unfathomable silence remained.

**Q:**&ensp;It all looks very simple and easy, but it is just not so. 
Sometimes the wonderful state of joyful peace dawns on me and I look and 
wonder, “how easily it comes and how intimate it seems, how totally my own. 
Where was the need to strive so hard for a state so near at hand? This time, 
surely, it has come to stay”. Yet how soon it all dissolves and leaves me 
wondering, “was it a taste of reality or another aberration?”. If it was 
reality, why did it go? Maybe some unique experience is needed to fix me for 
good in the new state and until the crucial experience comes, this game of 
hide and seek must continue.

**M:**&ensp;Your expectation of something unique and dramatic, of some 
wonderful explosion, is merely hindering and delaying your self-realisation. 
You are not to expect an explosion, for the explosion has already happened — 
at the moment when you were born, when you realised yourself as 
being–knowing–feeling. There is only one mistake you are making: you take the 
inner for the outer and the outer for the inner. What is in you, you take to 
be outside you and what is outside, you take to be in you. The mind and 
feelings are external, but you take them to be intimate. You believe the world 
to be objective, while it is entirely a projection of your psyche. That is the 
basic confusion and no new explosion will set it right. You have to think 
yourself out of it. There is no other way. 

**Q:**&ensp;How am I to think myself out when my thoughts come and go as they 
like? Their endless chatter distracts and exhausts me.

**M:**&ensp;Watch your thoughts as you watch the street traffic. People come 
and go; you register these without response. It may not be easy in the 
beginning, but with some practice you will find that your mind can function on 
many levels at the same time and you can be aware of them all. It is only when 
you have a vested interest in any particular level that your attention gets 
caught in it and you black out on other levels. Even then, the work on the 
blacked out levels goes on, outside the field of consciousness. 

Do not struggle with your memories and thoughts; try only to include in your 
field of attention the other, more important questions like: “Who am I?”, “How 
did I happen to be born?”, “Whence this universe around me?”, “What is real 
and what is momentary?”. No memory will persist if you lose interest in it; it 
is the emotional link that perpetuates the bondage. You are always seeking 
pleasure, avoiding pain; always after happiness and peace. Don’t you see that 
it is your very search for happiness that makes you feel miserable? Try the 
other way: Be indifferent to pain and pleasure, neither asking nor refusing, 
give all your attention to the level on which ‘I am’ is timelessly present. 
Soon you will realise that peace and happiness are in your very nature and it 
is only seeking them through some particular channels that disturbs. Avoid the 
disturbance, that is all. To seek there is no need — you would not seek what 
you already have. You yourself are God, the Supreme Reality. To begin with, 
trust me, trust the Teacher. It enables you to make the first step — and then 
your trust is justified by your own experience. In every walk of life, initial 
trust is essential; without it little can be done. Every undertaking is an act 
of faith. Even your daily bread you eat on trust! By remembering what I told 
you, you will achieve everything. I am telling you again: You are the 
all-pervading, all transcending reality. Behave accordingly: Think, feel and 
act in harmony with the whole and the actual experience of what I say will 
dawn upon you in no time. No effort is needed. Have faith and act on it. 
Please see that I want nothing from you. It is in your own interest that I 
speak because, above all, you love yourself and you want yourself to be 
secure and happy. Don’t be ashamed of it; don’t deny it. It is natural and 
good to love oneself. Only you should know what exactly it is that you love. 
It is not the body that you love, it is Life: perceiving, feeling, thinking, 
doing, loving, striving, creating. It is that Life you love, which is you, 
which is all. Realise it in its totality, beyond all divisions and 
limitations, and all your desires will merge in it, for the greater contains 
the smaller. Therefore find yourself, for in finding that you find all. 

Everybody is glad to be. But few know the fullness of it. You come to know by 
dwelling in your mind on ‘I am’, ‘I know’, ‘I love’ — with the will of 
reaching the deepest meaning of these words.

**Q:**&ensp;Can I think, “I am God”?

**M:**&ensp;Don’t identify yourself with an idea. If by ‘God’ you mean the 
Unknown, then you merely say, “I do not know what I am”. If you know God as 
you know yourself, you need not say it. Best is the simple feeling ‘I am’. 
Dwell on it patiently. Here patience is wisdom; don’t think of failure. There 
can be no failure in this undertaking.

**Q:**&ensp;My thoughts will not let me.

**M:**&ensp;Pay no attention. Don’t fight them. Just do nothing about them; 
let them be, whatever they are. Your very fighting them gives them life. Just 
disregard. Look through. Remember to remember: “Whatever happens — happens 
because I am”. All reminds you that you *are*. Take full advantage of the fact 
that to experience you must *be*. You need not stop thinking. Just cease being 
interested. It is disinterestedness that liberates. Don’t hold on, that is 
all. The world is made of rings. The hooks are all yours. Make straight your 
hooks and nothing can hold you. Give up your addictions. There is nothing else 
to give up. Stop your routine of acquisitiveness, your habit of looking for 
results and the freedom of the universe is yours. Be effortless.

**Q:**&ensp;Life is effort. There are so many things to do.

**M:**&ensp;What needs doing, do it. Don’t resist. Your balance must be 
dynamic, based on doing just the right thing from moment to moment. Don’t be a 
child unwilling to grow up. Stereotyped gestures and postures will not help 
you. Rely entirely on your clarity of thought, purity of motive and integrity 
of action. You cannot possibly go wrong. Go beyond and leave all behind.

**Q:**&ensp;But can anything be left for good?

**M:**&ensp;You want something like a round-the-clock ecstasy. Ecstasies come 
and go, necessarily, for the human brain cannot stand the tension for a long 
time. A prolonged ecstasy will burn out your brain unless it is extremely pure 
and subtle. In nature nothing is at stand-still — everything pulsates, appears 
and disappears. Heart, breath, digestion, sleep and waking, birth and death — 
everything comes and goes in waves. Rhythm, periodicity, harmonious 
alternation of extremes is the rule. No use rebelling against the very pattern 
of life. If you seek the immutable, go beyond experience. When I say, 
“remember ‘I am’ all the time”, I mean come back to it repeatedly. No 
particular thought can be mind’s natural state, only silence. Not the idea of 
silence but silence itself. When the mind is in its natural state, it reverts 
to silence spontaneously after every experience or, rather, every experience 
happens against the background of silence. 

Now, what you have learnt here becomes the seed. You may forget it — 
apparently. But it will live and in due season sprout and grow and bring forth 
flowers and fruits. All will happen by itself. You need not *do* anything — 
just don’t prevent it.

<script>
export default {
  props: ["slot-key"],
  mounted () {
    tippy("[data-tippy-content]", {allowHTML: true});
  }
}
</script>