# 73. The Death of the Mind Is the Birth of Wisdom

>You may die a hundred deaths without a break in the mental turmoil. Or you 
may keep your body and die only in the mind. The death of the mind is the 
birth of wisdom.

**Questioner:**&ensp;Before one can realise one’s true nature, doesn’t one 
need to be a person? Does not the ego have its value?

**Maharaj:**&ensp;The person is of little use. It is deeply involved in its 
own affairs and is completely ignorant of its true being. Unless the 
witnessing consciousness begins to play on the person and it becomes the 
object of observation rather than the subject, realisation is not feasible. It 
is the witness that makes realisation desirable and attainable.

**Q:**&ensp;There comes a point in a person’s life when it becomes the witness. 

**M:**&ensp;Oh, no. The person by itself will not become the witness. It is 
like expecting a cold candle to start burning in the course of time. The 
person can stay in the darkness of ignorance forever unless the flame of 
awareness touches it.

**Q:**&ensp;Who lights the candle?

**M:**&ensp;The <span data-tippy-content="Spiritual teacher, 
preceptor.">guru</span>. His words, his presence. In India, it is very often 
the <span data-tippy-content="Incantation, hymn, an instrument of thought, 
ideal sounds visualised as letters and vocalised as syllables. A 
<em>mantra</em> is a group of words whose constant repetition produces 
specific results.">mantra</span>. Once the candle is lit, the flame will 
consume the candle.

**Q:**&ensp;Why is the *mantra* so effective?

**M:**&ensp;Constant repetition of the *mantra* is something the person does 
not do for one’s own sake. The beneficiary is not the person. Just like the 
candle which does not increase by burning.

**Q:**&ensp;Can the person become aware of itself by itself?

**M:**&ensp;Yes, it happens sometimes as a result of much suffering The *guru* 
wants to save you the endless pain. Such is his grace. Even when there is no 
discoverable outer *guru*, there is always the <span data-tippy-content="The 
true spiritual teacher.">sadguru</span>, the inner *guru*, who directs and 
helps from within. The words ‘outer’ and “inner” are relative to the body 
only; in reality all is one, the outer being merely a projection of the inner. 
Awareness comes as if from a higher dimension.

**Q:**&ensp;Before the spark is lit and after, what is the difference? 

**M:**&ensp;Before the spark is lit there is no witness to perceive the 
difference. The person may be conscious, but is not aware of being conscious. 
It is completely identified with what it thinks and feels and experiences. The 
darkness that is in it is of its own creation. When the darkness is 
questioned, it dissolves. The desire to question is planted by the *guru*. In 
other words, the difference between the person and the witness is as between 
not knowing and knowing oneself. The world seen in consciousness is to be of 
the nature of consciousness when there is harmony (<span 
data-tippy-content="Being, existence, true essence. In <em>yoga</em> the 
quality of purity or goodness.">sattva</span>); but when activity and 
passivity (<span data-tippy-content="Motivity, activity, energy. One of 
the three <em>guna</em>s or qualities of matter: <em>sattva</em>, 
<em>rajas</em> and <em>tamas</em>. In <em>yoga</em>, egoism.">rajas</span> and 
<span data-tippy-content="Darkness, inertia, passivity. One of the three 
constituents (<em>guna</em>s) of the cosmic substance: <em>sattva</em>, 
<em>rajas</em> and <em>tamas</em>.">tamas</span>) appear, they obscure and 
distort and you see the false as real.

**Q:**&ensp;What can the person do to prepare itself for the coming of the 
*guru*?

**M:**&ensp;The very desire to be ready means that the *guru* had come and the 
flame is lit. It may be a stray word or a page in a book; the *guru*’s grace 
works mysteriously.

**Q:**&ensp;Is there no such thing as self-preparation? We hear so much about 
<span data-tippy-content="One of the six systems of the Hindu philosophy (from 
<em>yoj</em>, to yoke or join). <em>Yoga</em> teaches the means by which the 
individual spirit (<em>jivatma</em>) can be joined or united with the 
universal spirit (<em>Paramatma</em>).">yoga</span> <span 
data-tippy-content="The practice which produces success, 
<em>siddhi</em>.">sadhana</span>.

**M:**&ensp;It is not the person that is doing *sadhana*. The person is in 
unrest and resistant to the very end. It is the witness that works on the 
person, on the totality of its illusions — past, present and future.

**Q:**&ensp;How can we know that what you say is true? While it is 
self-contained and free from inner contradictions, how can we know that it is 
not a product of fertile imagination, nurtured and enriched by constant 
repetition?

**M:**&ensp;The proof of the truth lies in its effect on the listener.

**Q:**&ensp;Words can have a most powerful effect. By hearing or repeating 
words, one can experience various kinds of trances. The listener’s experiences 
may be induced and cannot be considered to be a proof.

**M:**&ensp;The effect need not necessarily be an experience. It can be a 
change in character, in motivation, in relationship to people and one’s self. 
Trances and visions induced by words, drugs or any other sensory or mental 
means are temporary and inconclusive. The truth of what is said here is 
immovable and everlasting. And the proof of it is in the listener, in the deep 
and permanent changes in his entire being. It is not something he can doubt 
unless he doubts his own existence, which is unthinkable. When my experience 
becomes your own experience also, what better proof do you want?

**Q:**&ensp;The experiencer is the proof of his experience.

**M:**&ensp;Quite, but the experiencer needs no proof. “I am, and I know I 
am”. You cannot ask for further proofs.

**Q:**&ensp;Can there be true knowledge of things?

**M:**&ensp;Relatively, yes. Absolutely — there are no things. To know that 
nothing *is* is true knowledge.

**Q:**&ensp;What is the link between the relative and the absolute?

**M:**&ensp;They are identical.

**Q:**&ensp;From which point of view are they identical?

**M:**&ensp;When the words are spoken, there is silence. When the relative is 
over, the absolute remains. The silence before the words were spoken — is it 
different from the silence that comes after? The silence is one, and without 
it the words could not have been heard. It is always there — at the back of 
the words. Shift your attention from words to silence and you will hear it. 
The mind craves experience, the memory of which it takes for knowledge. The 
<span data-tippy-content="The knower, especially of the higher knowledge 
derived from meditation; “closely related to the knowledge of 
Brahman”.">jnani</span> is beyond all experience and his memory is empty of 
the past. He is entirely unrelated to anything in particular. But the mind 
craves for formulations and definitions, always eager to squeeze reality into 
a verbal shape. Of everything it wants an idea, for without ideas the mind is 
not. Reality is essentially alone, but the mind will not leave it alone — and 
deals instead with the unreal. And yet it is all the mind can do — discover 
the unreal as unreal.

**Q:**&ensp;And seeing the real as real?

**M:**&ensp;There is no such state as seeing the real. Who is to see what? You 
can only be the real — which you are anyhow. The problem is only mental. 
Abandon false ideas, that is all. There is no need of true ideas. There aren’t 
any.

**Q:**&ensp;Why then are we encouraged to seek the real?

**M:**&ensp;The mind must have a purpose. To encourage it to free itself from 
the unreal it is promised something in return. In reality, there is no need of 
purpose. Being free from the false is good in itself; it wants no reward. It 
is just like being clean — it is its own reward.

**Q:**&ensp;Is not self-knowledge the reward?

**M:**&ensp;The reward of self-knowledge is freedom from the personal self. 
You cannot know the knower, for you *are* the knower. The fact of knowing 
proves the knower. You need no other proof. The knower of the known is not 
knowable. Just like the light is known in colours only, so is the knower known 
in knowledge.

**Q:**&ensp;Is the knower an inference only?

**M:**&ensp;You know your body, mind and feelings. Are you an inference only?

**Q:**&ensp;I am an inference to others, but not to myself.

**M:**&ensp;So am I. An inference to you, but not to myself. I know myself by 
being myself. As you know yourself to be a man by being one. You do not keep 
on reminding yourself that you are a man. It is only when your humanity is 
questioned that you assert it. Similarly, I know that I am all. I do not need 
to keep on repeating, “I am all, I am all”. Only when you take me to be a 
particular, a person, I protest. As you are a man all the time, so I am what I 
am — all the time. Whatever you are changelessly, that you are beyond all 
doubt.

**Q:**&ensp;When I ask how do you know that you are a *jnani*, you answer, “I 
find no desire in me. Is this not a proof?”.

**M:**&ensp;Were I full of desires, I would have still been what I am.

**Q:**&ensp;Myself, full of desires, and you, full of desires — what 
difference would there be?

**M:**&ensp;You identify yourself with your desires and become their slave. To 
me desires are things among other things, mere clouds in the mental sky, and I 
do not feel compelled to act on them.

**Q:**&ensp;The knower and his knowledge, are they one or two?

**M:**&ensp;They are both. The knower is the unmanifested, the known is the 
manifested. The known is always on the move — it changes, it has no shape of 
its own, no dwelling place. The knower is the immutable support of all 
knowledge. Each needs the other, but reality lies beyond. The *jnani* cannot 
be known because there is nobody to be known. When there is a person, you can 
tell something about it, but when there is no self-identification with the 
particular, what can be said? You may tell a *jnani* anything; his question 
will always be, “About whom are you talking? There is no such person”. Just as 
you cannot say anything about the universe because it includes everything, so 
nothing can be said about a *jnani*, for he is all and yet nothing in 
particular. You need a hook to hang your picture on; when there is no hook, on 
what will the picture hang? To locate a thing you need space, to place an 
event you need time; but the timeless and spaceless defies all handling. It 
makes everything perceivable, yet it itself is beyond perception. The mind 
cannot know what is beyond the mind, but the mind is known by what is beyond 
it. The *jnani* knows neither birth nor death; existence and non-existence are 
the same to him.

**Q:**&ensp;When your body dies, you remain.

**M:**&ensp;Nothing dies. The body is just imagined. There is no such thing.

**Q:**&ensp;Before another century will pass, you will be dead to all around 
you. Your body will be covered with flowers, then burnt and the ashes 
scattered. That will be our experience. What will be yours?

**M:**&ensp;Time will come to an end. This is called the Great Death (<span 
data-tippy-content="The final dissolution, the great death of all 
creation.">maha-mrityu</span>), the death of time.

**Q:**&ensp;Does it mean that the universe and its contents will come to an 
end?

**M:**&ensp;The universe is your personal experience. How can it be affected? 
You might have been delivering a lecture for two hours; where has it gone when 
it is over? It has merged into silence in which the beginning, middle and end 
of the lecture are all together. Time has come to a stop, it was, but is no 
more. The silence after a life of talking and the silence after a life of 
silence is the same silence. Immortality is freedom from the feeling “I Am”. 
Yet it is not extinction. On the contrary, it is a state infinitely more real, 
aware and happy than you can possibly think of. Only self-consciousness is no 
more.

**Q:**&ensp;Why does the Great Death of the mind coïncide with the “small death” of the body?

**M:**&ensp;It does not! You may die a hundred deaths without a break in the 
mental turmoil. Or you may keep your body and die only in the mind. The death 
of the mind is the birth of wisdom.

**Q:**&ensp;The person goes and only the witness remains.

**M:**&ensp;Who remains to say, “I am the witness”? When there is no “I Am”, 
where is the witness? In the timeless state there is no self to take refuge in.

The man who carries a parcel is anxious not to lose it — he is 
parcel-conscious. The man who cherishes the feeling “I Am”, is self-conscious. 
The *jnani* holds on to nothing and cannot be said to be conscious. And yet he 
is not unconscious. He is the very heart of awareness. We call him <span 
data-tippy-content="Naked, “sky-clad”.">digambara</span>, clothed in space, 
the Naked One, beyond all appearance. There is no name and shape under which 
he may be said to exist, yet he is the only one that truly *is*.

**Q:**&ensp;I cannot grasp it.

**M:**&ensp;Who can? The mind has its limits. It is enough to bring you to the 
very frontiers of knowledge and make you face the immensity of the unknown — 
whether to dive in is up to you.

**Q:**&ensp;What about the witness? Is it real or unreal?

**M:**&ensp;It is both — the last remnant of illusion, the first touch of the 
real. To say, “I am only the witness” is both false and true: false because of 
the “I Am”, true because of the witness. It is better to say, “There is 
witnessing”. The moment you say, “I am”, the entire universe comes into being 
along with its creator.

**Q:**&ensp;Another question: Can we visualise the person and the self as two 
brothers, one small and one big? The little brother is mischievous and 
selfish, rude and restless, while the big brother is intelligent and kind, 
reasonable and considerate, free from body-consciousness with its desires and 
fears. The big brother knows the little one, but the small one is ignorant of 
the big one and thinks himself to be entirely on his own. The *guru* comes and 
tells the smaller one, “You are not alone — you come from a very good family. 
Your brother is a very remarkable man — wise and kind, and he loves you very 
much. Remember him, think of him, find him, serve him, and you will become one 
with him”. Now the question is, are there two in us, the personal and the 
individual, the false self and the true self, or is it only a simile?

**M:**&ensp;It is both. They appear to be two, but on investigation they are 
found to be one. Duality lasts only as long as it is not questioned. The 
trinity of mind, self and spirit (<span data-tippy-content="Person, the outer 
self.">vyakti</span>, <span data-tippy-content="Manifest matter, the evolved 
nature. Opposite is <em>avyakta</em>.">vyakta</span>, <span 
data-tippy-content="Unmanifest. Opposite is <em>vyakta</em>.">avyakta</span>), 
when looked into, becomes unity. These are only modes of experiencing — of 
attachment, of detachment, of transcendence.

**Q:**&ensp;Your assumption that we are in a dream state makes your position 
unassailable. Whatever objection we raise, you just deny its validity. One 
cannot discuss with you!

**M:**&ensp;The desire to discuss is also mere desire. The desire to know, to 
have the power, even the desire to exist are desires only. Everybody desires 
to *be*, to survive, to continue, for no one is sure of himself. But everybody 
is immortal. You make yourself mortal by taking yourself to be the body.

**Q:**&ensp;Since you have found your freedom, will you not give me a little 
of it?

**M:**&ensp;Why little? Take the whole. Take it — it is there for the taking. 
But you are afraid of freedom!

**Q:**&ensp;Swami Ramdas had to deal with a similar request. Some devotees 
collected round him one day and began to ask for liberation. Ramdas listened 
smilingly and then suddenly he became serious and said, “You can have it, here 
and now — freedom absolute and permanent. Whoëver wants it, come forward”. 
Nobody moved. Thrice he repeated the offer. None accepted. Then he said, “The 
offer is withdrawn”.

**M:**&ensp;Attachment destroys courage. The giver is always ready to give. 
The taker is absent. Freedom means letting go. People just do not care to let 
go everything. They do not know that the finite is the price of the infinite, 
as death is the price of immortality. Spiritual maturity lies in the readiness 
to let go of everything. The giving up is the first step. But the real giving 
up is in realising that there is nothing to give up, for nothing is your own. 
It is like deep sleep — you do not give up your bed when you fall sleep — you 
just forget it.

<script>
export default {
  props: ["slot-key"],
  mounted () {
    tippy("[data-tippy-content]", {allowHTML: true});
  }
}
</script>