# 56. Consciousness Arising, World Arises

>Consciousness arising, the world arises. When you consider the wisdom and the 
beauty of the world, you call it God. Know the source of it all which is in 
yourself, and you will find all your questions answered.

**Questioner:**&ensp;When an ordinary man dies, what happens to him?

**Maharaj:**&ensp;It happens according to his belief. As life before death is 
but imagination, so is life after. The dream continues.

**Q:**&ensp;And what about the <span data-tippy-content="The knower, 
especially of the higher knowledge derived from meditation; “closely related 
to the knowledge of Brahman”. (*jna*, to know; *jnani*, the 
knower).">jnani</span>?

**M:**&ensp;The *jnani* does not die because he was never born.

**Q:**&ensp;He appears so to others.

**M:**&ensp;But not to himself. In himself he is free of things — physical and 
mental.

**Q:**&ensp;Still you must know the state of the man who died. At least from 
your own past lives.

**M:**&ensp;Until I met my <span data-tippy-content="Spiritual teacher, preceptor.">guru</span> I knew so many things. Now I know nothing, for all knowledge is in dream only and not valid. I know myself and I find no life nor death in me, only pure being — not being this or that, but just *being*. But the moment the mind, drawing on its stock of memories, begins to imagine, it fills the space with objects and time with events. As I do not know even this birth, how can I know past births? It is the mind that, itself in movement, sees everything moving, and having created time, worries about the past and future. All the universe is cradled in consciousness (<span data-tippy-content="The great reality, supreme consciousness.">mahatattva</span>) which arises where there is perfect order and harmony (<span data-tippy-content="The supreme harmony, harmonious existence.">mahasattva</span>). As all waves are in the ocean, so are all things physical and mental in awareness. Hence awareness itself is all important, not the content of it. Deepen and broaden your awareness of yourself and all the blessings will flow. You need not seek anything; all will come to you most naturally and effortlessly. The five senses and the four functions of the mind: memory, thought, understanding and selfhood; the five elements: earth, water, fire, air and ether; the two aspects of creation: matter and spirit; all are contained in awareness.

**Q:**&ensp;Yet you must believe in having lived before.

**M:**&ensp;The scriptures say so, but I know nothing about it. I know myself as I am; as I appeared or will appear is not within my experience. It is not that I do not remember. In fact, there is nothing to remember. Reïncarnation implies a reïncarnating self. There is no such thing. The bundle of memories and hopes, called the “I”, imagines itself existing everlastingly and creates time to accommodate its false eternity To *be*, I need no past or future. All experience is born of imagination; I do not imagine, so no birth or death happens to me. Only those who think themselves born can think themselves reborn. You are accusing me of having been born — I plead not guilty! 

All exists in awareness and awareness neither dies nor is reborn. It is the changeless reality itself. 

All the universe of experience is born with the body and dies with the body; 
it has its beginning and end in awareness, but awareness knows no beginning or 
end. If you think it out carefully and brood over it for a long time, you will 
come to see the light of awareness in all its clarity and the world will fade 
out of your vision. It is like looking at a burning incense stick; you see the 
stick and the smoke first; when you notice the fiery point, you realise that 
it has the power to consume mountains of sticks and fill the universe with 
smoke. 

Timelessly the self actualises itself, without exhausting its infinite possibilities. In the incense stick simile, the stick is the body and the smoke is the mind. As long as the mind is busy with its contortions, it does not perceive its own source. The *guru* comes and turns your attention to the spark within. By its very nature the mind is outward-turned; it always tends to seek for the source of things among the things themselves; to be told to look for the source within, is, in a way, the beginning of a new life. Awareness takes the place of consciousness; in consciousness there is the “I” who is conscious while awareness is undivided; awareness is aware of itself. The “I Am” is a thought while awareness is not a thought; there is no “I am aware” in awareness. Consciousness is an attribute while awareness is not, one can be aware of being conscious, but not conscious of awareness. God is the totality of consciousness, but awareness is beyond all — being as well as not-being.

**Q:**&ensp;I had started with the question about the condition of a man after 
death. When his body is destroyed, what happens to his consciousness? Does he 
carry his senses of seeing and hearing along with him or does he leave them 
behind? And, if he loses his senses, what becomes to his consciousness?

**M:**&ensp;Senses are mere modes of perception. As the grosser modes 
disappear, finer states of consciousness emerge.

**Q:**&ensp;Is there no transition to awareness after death?

**M:**&ensp;There can be no transition from consciousness to awareness, for 
awareness is not a form of consciousness. Consciousness can only become more 
subtle and refined and that is what happens after death. As the various 
vehicles of man die off, the modes of consciousness induced by them also fade 
away.

**Q:**&ensp;Until only unconsciousness remains?

**M:**&ensp;Look at yourself talking of unconsciousness as something that 
comes and goes! Who is there to be conscious of unconsciousness? As long as 
the window is open, there is sunlight in the room. With the windows shut, the 
sun remains, but does it see the darkness in the room? Is there anything like 
darkness to the sun? There is no such thing as unconsciousness, for 
unconsciousness is not experienceable. We infer unconsciousness when there is a 
lapse in memory or communication. If I stop reäcting, you will say that I am 
unconscious. In reality I may be most acutely conscious but unable to 
communicate or remember.

**Q:**&ensp;I am asking a simple question: There are about four billion people 
in the world and they are all bound to die. What will be their condition after 
death — not physically, but psychologically? Will their consciousness 
continue? And if it does, in what form? Do not tell me that I am not asking 
the right question or that you do not know the answer or that in your world 
my question is meaningless; the moment you start talking about your world and 
my world as different and incompatible, you build a wall between us. Either 
we live in one world or your experience is of no use to us.

**M:**&ensp;Of course we live in one world. Only I see it as it is while you 
don’t. You see yourself in the world while I see the world in myself. To you, 
you are born and die, while to me, the world appears and disappears. Our world 
is real, but your view of it is not. There is no wall between us except the 
one built by you. There is nothing wrong with the senses; it is your 
imagination that misleads you. It covers up the world as it is with what you 
imagine it to be — something existing independently of you and yet closely 
following your inherited or acquired patterns. There is a deep contradiction 
in your attitude which you do not see and which is the cause of sorrow. You 
cling to the idea that you were born into a world of pain and sorrow; I know 
that the world is a child of love, having its beginning, growth and 
fulfilment in love. But I am even beyond love.

**Q:**&ensp;If you have created the world out of love, why is it so full of 
pain?

**M:**&ensp;You are right — from the body’s point of view. But you are not the 
body. You are the immensity and infinity of consciousness. Don’t assume what 
is not true and you will see things as I see them. Pain and pleasure, good and 
bad, right and wrong — these are relative terms and must not be taken 
absolutely. They are limited and temporary.

**Q:**&ensp;In the Buddhist tradition it is stated that a *Nirvani*, an 
enlightened Buddha, has the freedom of the universe. He can know and 
experience for himself all that exists. He can command, interfere with nature, 
with the chain of causation, change the sequence of events, even undo the 
past! The world is still with him, but he is free in it.

**M:**&ensp;What you describe is God. Of course, where there is a universe, 
there will also be its counterpart, which is God. But I am beyond both. There 
was a kingdom in search of a king. They found the right man and made him king. 
In no way had he changed. He was merely given the title, the rights and the 
duties of a king. His nature was not affected, only his actions. Similarly, 
with the enlightened man — the content of his consciousness undergoes a 
radical transformation. But he is not misled. He knows the changeless.

**Q:**&ensp;The changeless cannot be conscious. Consciousness is always of 
change. The changeless leaves no trace in consciousness.

**M:**&ensp;Yes and no. The paper is not the writing, yet it carries the 
writing. The ink is not the message, nor is the reader’s mind the message — 
but they all make the message possible.

**Q:**&ensp;Does consciousness come down from reality or is it an attribute of 
matter?

**M:**&ensp;Consciousness as such is the subtle counterpart of matter. Just as 
inertia (<span data-tippy-content="Darkness, inertia, passivity. One of the 
three constituents (<em>guna</em>s) of the cosmic substance: <em>sattva</em>, 
<em>rajas</em> and <em>tamas</em>.">tamas</span>) and energy (<span 
data-tippy-content="Motivity, activity, energy. One of the three 
<em>guna</em>s or qualities of matter: <em>sattva</em>, <em>rajas</em> and 
<em>tamas</em>. In <em>yoga</em>, egoism.">rajas</span>) are attributes of 
matter, so does harmony (<span data-tippy-content="Being, existence, true 
essence. In <em>yoga</em> the quality of purity or goodness.">sattva</span>) 
manifest itself as consciousness. You may consider it in a way as a form of 
very subtle energy. Wherever matter organises itself into a stable organism, 
consciousness appears spontaneously. With the destruction of the organism, 
consciousness disappears.

**Q:**&ensp;Then what survives?

**M:**&ensp;That of which matter and consciousness are but aspects, which is 
neither born nor dies.

**Q:**&ensp;If it is beyond matter and consciousness, how can it be 
experienced?

**M:**&ensp;It can be known by its effects on both; look for it in beauty and 
in bliss. But you will understand neither body nor consciousness, unless you 
go beyond both.

**Q:**&ensp;Please tell us squarely: are you conscious or unconscious?

**M:**&ensp;The enlightened (*jnani*) is neither. But in his enlightenment 
(<span data-tippy-content="Knowledge, especially the higher knowledge derived 
from meditation; “closely related to the knowledge of Brahman”.">jnana</span>) 
all is contained. Awareness contains every experience. But he who is aware is 
beyond every experience. He is beyond awareness itself.

**Q:**&ensp;There is the background of experience, call it matter. There is 
the experiencer, call it mind. What makes the bridge between the two?

**M:**&ensp;The very gap between is the bridge. That which at one end looks 
like matter and at the other as mind is in itself the bridge. Don’t separate 
reality into mind and body and there will be no need of bridges. 

Consciousness arising, the world arises. When you consider the wisdom and the 
beauty of the world, you call it God. Know the source of it all which is in 
yourself, and you will find all your questions answered.

**Q:**&ensp;The seer and the seen — are they one or two?

**M:**&ensp;There is only seeing — both the seer and the seen are contained in 
it. Don’t create differences where there are none.

**Q:**&ensp;I began with the question about the man who died. You said that 
his experiences will shape themselves according to his expectations and 
beliefs.

**M:**&ensp;Before you were born you expected to live according to a plan 
which you yourself had laid down. Your own will was the backbone of your 
destiny.

**Q:**&ensp;Surely, <span data-tippy-content="Action or “the fruits of 
action”. <em>Karma</em> is of three kinds: <em>sanchita</em> (accumulated from 
previous births), <em>prarabdha</em> (portion of the past <em>karma</em> to be 
worked out in the present life) and <em>agami</em> (the current <em>karma</em> 
the result of which will fructify in future).">karma</span> interfered.

**M:**&ensp;*Karma* shapes the circumstances; the attitudes are your own. 
Ultimately your character shapes your life and you alone can shape your 
character.

**Q:**&ensp;How does one shape one’s character?

**M:**&ensp;By seeing it as it is, and being sincerely sorry. This integral 
seeing-feeling can work miracles. It is like casting a bronze image: metal 
alone or fire alone will not do; nor will the mould be of any use; you have to 
melt down the metal in the heat of the fire and cast it in the mould.

<script>
export default {
  props: ["slot-key"],
  mounted () {
    tippy("[data-tippy-content]", {allowHTML: true});
  }
}
</script>