# 78. All Knowledge Is Ignorance

>Earlier, I was sure of so many things: now I am sure of nothing. But I feel 
that I have lost nothing by no knowing, because all my knowledge was false. My 
not knowing was in itself knowledge of the fact that all knowledge is ignorance 
…

**Questioner:**&ensp;Are we permitted to request you to tell us the manner of 
your realisation?

**Maharaj:**&ensp;Somehow it was very simple and easy in my case. My <span 
data-tippy-content="Spiritual teacher, preceptor.">guru</span>, before he 
died, told me, “Believe me — you are the Supreme Reality. Don’t doubt my 
words, don’t disbelieve me. I am telling you the truth — act on it”. I could 
not forget his words and by not forgetting, I have realised.

**Q:**&ensp;But what were you actually doing?

**M:**&ensp;Nothing special. I lived my life, plied my trade, looked after my 
family, and every free moment I would spend just remembering my *guru* and his 
words. He died soon after and I had only the memory to fall back on. It was 
enough.

**Q:**&ensp;It must have been the grace and power of your *guru*.

**M:**&ensp;His words were true and so they came true. True words always come 
true. My *guru* did nothing; his words acted because they were true. Whatever 
I did came from within, unasked and unexpected.

**Q:**&ensp;The *guru* started a process without taking any part in it?

**M:**&ensp;Put it as you like. Things happen as they happen — who can tell 
why and how? I did nothing deliberately. All came by itself — the desire to 
let go, to be alone, to go within.

**Q:**&ensp;You made no efforts whatsoëver?

**M:**&ensp;None. Believe it or not, I was not even anxious to realise. He 
only told me that I am the Supreme and then died. I just could not disbelieve 
him. The rest happened by itself. I found myself changing — that is all. As a 
matter of fact, I was astonished. But a desire arose in me to verify his 
words. I was so sure that he could not possibly have told a lie that I felt I 
shall either realise the full meaning of his words or die. I was feeling quite 
determined, but did not know what to do. I would spend hours thinking of him 
and his assurance, not arguing, but just remembering what he told me.

**Q:**&ensp;What happened to you then? How did you know that you were the 
Supreme?

**M:**&ensp;Nobody came to tell me. Nor was I told so inwardly. In fact, it 
was only in the beginning when I was making efforts, that I was passing 
through some strange experiences: seeing lights, hearing voices, meeting gods 
and goddesses and conversing with them. Once the *guru* told me, “You are the 
Supreme Reality”, I ceased having visions and trances and became very quiet 
and simple. I found myself desiring and knowing less and less until I could 
say in utter astonishment, “I know nothing, I want nothing”.

**Q:**&ensp;Were you genuinely free of desire and knowledge, or did you 
impersonate a <span data-tippy-content="The knower, especially of the higher 
knowledge derived from meditation; “closely related to the knowledge of 
Brahman”.">jnani</span> according to the image given to you by your *guru*?

**M:**&ensp;I was not given any image, nor did I have one. My *guru* never 
told me what to expect.

**Q:**&ensp;More things may happen to you. Are you at the end of your journey?

**M:**&ensp;There was never any journey. I am as I always was.

**Q:**&ensp;What was the Supreme Reality you were supposed to reach?

**M:**&ensp;I was undeceived, that is all. I used to create a world and 
populate it — now I don’t do it any more.

**Q:**&ensp;Where do you live, then?

**M:**&ensp;In the void beyond being and non-being, beyond consciousness. This 
void is also fullness; do not pity me. It is like a man saying, “I have done 
my work, there is nothing left to do”.

**Q:**&ensp;You are giving a certain date to your realisation. It means 
something did happen to you on that date. What happened?

**M:**&ensp;The mind ceased producing events. The ancient and ceaseless search 
stopped — I wanted nothing, expected nothing, accepted nothing as my own. 
There was no “me” left to strive for. Even the bare “I Am” faded away. The 
other thing that I noticed was that I lost all my habitual certainties. 
Earlier, I was sure of so many things: now I am sure of nothing. But I feel 
that I have lost nothing by not knowing because all my knowledge was false. My 
not knowing was in itself knowledge of the fact that all knowledge is 
ignorance, that “I do not know” is the only true statement the mind can make. Take the idea “I was born”. You may take it to be true. It is not. You were 
never born, nor will you ever die. It is the idea that was born and shall die, 
not you. By identifying yourself with it you became mortal. Just like in a 
cinema all is light, so does consciousness become the vast world. Look closely 
and you will see that all names and forms are but transitory waves on the 
ocean of consciousness, that only consciousness can be said to be, not its 
transformations. In the immensity of consciousness a light appears, a tiny 
point that moves rapidly and traces shapes, thoughts and feelings, concepts 
and ideas, like the pen writing on paper. And the ink that leaves a trace is 
memory. You are that tiny point and by your movement the world is ever 
recreated. Stop moving, and there will be no world. Look within and you will 
find that the point of light is the reflection of the immensity of light in 
the body, as is the sense “I Am”. There is only light; all else appears.

**Q:**&ensp;Do you know that light? Have you seen it?

**M:**&ensp;To the mind it appears as darkness. It can be known only through 
its reflections. All is seen in daylight — except daylight.

**Q:**&ensp;Have I to understand that our minds are similar?

**M:**&ensp;How can it be? You have your own private mind, woven with 
memories, held together by desires and fears. I have no mind of my own; what I 
need to know, the universe brings before me, as it supplies the food I eat.

**Q:**&ensp;Do you know all you want to know?

**M:**&ensp;There is nothing I want to know. But what I need to know, I come 
to know.

**Q:**&ensp;Does this knowledge come to you from within or from outside?

**M:**&ensp;It does not apply. My inner is outside and my outer is inside. I 
may get from you the knowledge needed at the moment, but you are not apart from me.

**Q:**&ensp;What is <span data-tippy-content="The superconscious state of 
<em>samadhi</em>, (<em>turiya</em>, fourth), the fourth state of soul in which 
it becomes one with <em>Brahman</em>, the highest awareness.">turiya</span>, 
the fourth state we hear about?

**M:**&ensp;To be the point of light tracing the world is *turiya*. To be the 
light itself is <span data-tippy-content="Beyond the highest 
awareness.">turiyatita</span>. But of what use are names when reality is so 
near?

**Q:**&ensp;Is there any progress in your condition? When you compare yourself 
yesterday with yourself today, do you find yourself changing, making progress? 
Does your vision of reality grow in width and depth?

**M:**&ensp;Reality is immovable and yet in constant movement. It is like a 
mighty river — it flows and yet it is there, eternally. What flows is not the 
river with its bed and banks, but its water. So does the <span 
data-tippy-content="Being, existence, true essence. In <em>yoga</em> the 
quality of purity or goodness.">sattva</span> <span 
data-tippy-content="Attributes, qualities. In <em>Samkhya</em> philosophy the 
three attributes of the cosmic substance (<em>prakriti</em>) are: illuminating 
(<em>sattva</em>), activating (<em>rajas</em>) and restraining 
(<em>tamas</em>).">guna</span>, the universal harmony, play its games against 
<span data-tippy-content="Darkness, inertia, passivity. One of the three 
constituents (<em>guna</em>s) of the cosmic substance: <em>sattva</em>, 
<em>rajas</em> and <em>tamas</em>.">tamas</span> and <span 
data-tippy-content="Motivity, activity, energy. One of the three 
<em>guna</em>s or qualities of matter: <em>sattva</em>, <em>rajas</em> and 
<em>tamas</em>. In <em>yoga</em>, egoism.">rajas</span>, the forces of 
darkness and despair. In *sattva* there is always change and progress, in 
*rajas* there is change and regress, while *tamas* stands for chaos. The three 
*guna*s play eternally against each other — it is a fact and there can be no 
quarrel with a fact.

**Q:**&ensp;Must I always go dull with *tamas* and desperate with *rajas*? 
What about *sattva*?

**M:**&ensp;*Sattva* is the radiance of your real nature. You can always find 
it beyond the mind and its many worlds. But if you want a world, you must 
accept the three *guna*s as inseparable — matter, energy, life — one in 
essence, distinct in appearance. They mix and flow in consciousness. In time 
and space there is eternal flow: birth and death again, advance, retreat, 
another advance, again retreat — apparently without a beginning and without 
end; reality being timeless, changeless, bodiless, and mindless awareness is 
bliss.

**Q:**&ensp;I understand that, according to you, everything is a state of 
consciousness. The world is full of things — a grain of sand is a thing, a 
planet is a thing. How are they related to consciousness?

**M:**&ensp;Where consciousness does not reach, matter begins. A thing is a 
form of being which we have not understood. It does not change, it is always 
the same; it appears to be there on its own — something strange and alien. Of 
course it is in the <span data-tippy-content="Universal 
consciousness.">chit</span>, consciousness, but appears to be outside because 
of its apparent changelessness. The foundation of things is in memory — 
without memory there would be no recognition. Creation, reflection, rejection 
— <span data-tippy-content="One of the gods of the Hindu trinity: 
Brahma, the creator; Vishnu, the preserver; Shiva, the 
destroyer.">Brahma</span>, <span data-tippy-content="One of the Gods of the 
Hindu trinity — Brahma, the creator; Vishnu, the preserver and Shiva, the 
destroyer.">Vishnu</span>, <span data-tippy-content="One of the gods of the 
Hindu trinity — Brahma, the creator; Vishnu, the preserver; and Shiva, the 
destroyer. Shiva actually means auspicious, propitious. Destruction of the 
cosmos by the god Shiva is a propitious act, for destruction precedes 
creation. Shiva is absolute love of the “I-principle” in a man. As a 
destroyer, he brings about the total annihilation of the human 
ego.">Shiva</span> — this is the eternal process. All things are governed by 
it.

**Q:**&ensp;Is there no escape?

**M:**&ensp;I am doing nothing else but showing the escape. Understand that 
the One includes the Three and that you are the One, and you shall be free of 
the world process.

**Q:**&ensp;What happens then to my consciousness?

**M:**&ensp;After the stage of creation comes the stage of examination and 
reflection and, finally, the stage of abandonment and forgetting. The 
consciousness remains, but in a latent, quiet state.

**Q:**&ensp;Does the state of identity remain?

**M:**&ensp;The state of identity is inherent in reality and never fades. But 
identity is neither the transient personality (<span 
data-tippy-content="Person, the outer self.">vyakti</span>) nor the <span 
data-tippy-content="Action or “the fruits of action”. <em>Karma</em> is of 
three kinds: <em>sanchita</em> (accumulated from previous births), 
<em>prarabdha</em> (portion of the past <em>karma</em> to be worked out in the 
present life) and <em>agami</em> (the current <em>karma</em> the result of 
which will fructify in future).">karma</span>-bound individuality (<span 
data-tippy-content="Manifest matter, the evolved nature. Opposite is 
<em>avyakta</em>.">vyakta</span>). It is what remains when all 
self-identification is given up as false — pure consciousness, the sense of 
being all there is or could be. Consciousness is pure in the beginning and 
pure in the end; in between, it becomes contaminated by imagination which is 
at the root of creation. At all times consciousness remains the same. To know 
it as it is — this is realisation and timeless peace.

**Q:**&ensp;Is the sense “I Am” real or unreal? 

**M:**&ensp;Both. It is unreal when we say, “I am this, I am that”. It is real 
when we mean, “I am not this, nor that”. 

The knower comes and goes with the known, and is transient; but that which 
knows that it does not know, which is free of memory and anticipation, is 
timeless.

**Q:**&ensp;Is “I Am” itself the witness, or are they separate?

**M:**&ensp;Without one the other cannot be. Yet they are not one. It is like 
the flower and its colour. Without flower, no colours; without colour, the 
flower remains unseen. Beyond is the light which on contact with the flower 
creates the colour. Realise that your true nature is that of pure light only, 
and both the perceived and the perceiver come and go together. That which 
makes both possible and yet is neither is your real being, which means not 
being a “this” or “that”, but pure awareness of being and not-being. When 
awareness is turned on itself, the feeling is of not knowing. When it is 
turned outward, the knowables come into being. To say, “I know myself” is a 
contradiction in terms, for what is “known”, cannot be “myself”.

**Q:**&ensp;If the self is forever the unknown, what then is realised in 
self-realisation?

**M:**&ensp;To know that the known cannot be me nor mine is liberation enough. 
Freedom from self-identification with a set of memories and habits; the state 
of wonder at the infinite reaches of the being and its inexhaustible 
creativity and total transcendence; the absolute fearlessness born from the 
realisation of the illusoriness and transiency of every mode of consciousness 
— these flow from a deep and inexhaustible source. To know the source as 
source, appearance as appearance and oneself as the source only, is 
self-realisation.

**Q:**&ensp;On what side is the witness? Is it real or unreal?

**M:**&ensp;Nobody can say, “I am the witness”. The “I Am” is always 
witnessed. The state of detached awareness is the witness-consciousness, the 
“mirror-mind”. It rises and sets with its object and thus it is not quite the 
real. Whatever its object, it remains the same; hence it is also real. It 
partakes of both the real and the unreal and is therefore a bridge between the 
two.

**Q:**&ensp;If all happens only to the “I Am”, if the “I Am” is the known and 
the knower and the knowledge itself, what does the witness do? Of what use is 
it?

**M:**&ensp;It does nothing and is of no use whatsoëver.

**Q:**&ensp;Then why do we talk of it?

**M:**&ensp;Because it is there. The bridge serves one purpose only — to cross 
over. You don’t build houses on a bridge. The “I Am” looks at things, the 
witness sees through them. It sees them as they are — unreal and transient. To 
say, “not me, not mine” is the task of the witness.

**Q:**&ensp;Is it the manifested (<span data-tippy-content="Manifested 
condition with the three <em>guna</em>s, qualities — <em>sattva</em>, 
<em>rajas</em> and <em>tamas</em>. The Supreme Absolute conceived of as 
possessing qualities like love, mercy and so forth, as distinguished from the 
undifferentiated Absolute of the <em>Advaita Vedanta</em>.">saguna</span>) by 
which the unmanifested (<span data-tippy-content="The unconditioned, without 
form, qualities or attributes.">nirguna</span>) is represented?

**M:**&ensp;The unmanifested is not represented. Nothing manifested can 
represent the unmanifested.

**Q:**&ensp;Then why do you talk of it?

**M:**&ensp;Because it is my birthplace.

<script>
export default {
  props: ["slot-key"],
  mounted () {
    tippy("[data-tippy-content]", {allowHTML: true});
  }
}
</script>