# 55. Give Up All and You Gain All

>There is trouble only when you cling to something. When you hold on to 
nothing, no trouble arises. The relinquishing of the lesser is the gaining of 
the greater. Give up all and you gain all.

**Questioner:**&ensp;What is your state at the present moment?

**Maharaj:**&ensp;A state of non-experiencing. In it, all experience is 
included.

**Q:**&ensp;Can you enter into the mind and heart of another man and share his 
experience?

**M:**&ensp;No. Such things require special training. I am like a dealer in 
wheat. I know little about breads and cakes. Even the taste of a wheat gruel I 
may not know. But about the wheat grain I know all and well. I know the source 
of all experience. But the innumerable particular forms experience can take I 
do not know. Nor do I need to know. From moment to moment, the little I need 
to know to live my life, I somehow happen to know.

**Q:**&ensp;Your particular existence and my particular existence — do they 
both exist in the mind of <span data-tippy-content="One of the gods of the 
Hindu trinity: Brahma, the creator; Vishnu, the preserver; Shiva, the 
destroyer.">Brahma</span>?

**M:**&ensp;The universal is not aware of the particular. The existence as a 
person is a personal matter. A person exists in time and space, has name and 
shape, beginning and end; the universal includes all persons and the absolute 
is at the root of and beyond all.

**Q:**&ensp;I am not concerned with the totality. My personal consciousness 
and your personal consciousness — what is the link between the two?

**M:**&ensp;Between two dreamers what can be the link?

**Q:**&ensp;They may dream of each other.

**M:**&ensp;That is what people are doing. Everyone imagines “others” and 
seeks a link with them. The seeker is the link; there is none other.

**Q:**&ensp;Surely there must be something in common between the many points 
of consciousness we are.

**M:**&ensp;Where are the many points? In your mind. You insist that your 
world is independent of your mind. How can it be? Your desire to know other 
people’s minds is due to your not knowing your own mind. First know your own 
mind and you will find that the question of other minds does not arise at all, 
for there are no other people. You are the common factor, the only link 
between the minds. Being is consciousness; “I Am” applies to all.

**Q:**&ensp;The Supreme Reality (<span data-tippy-content="The Supreme 
Reality.">Parabrahman</span>) may be present in all of us. But of what use is 
it to us?

**M:**&ensp;You are like a man who says, “I need a place where I may keep my 
things, but of what use is space to me?”. Or, “I need milk, tea, coffee or 
soda, but for water I have no use”. Don’t you see that the Supreme Reality is 
what makes everything possible? But if you ask of what use is it to you, I 
must answer, “None”. In matters of daily life the knower of the real has no 
advantage — he may even be at a disadvantage: being free from greed and fear, 
he does not protect himself. The very idea of profit is foreign to him; he 
abhors accretions; his life is constant divesting, sharing, giving.

**Q:**&ensp;If there is no advantage in gaining the Supreme, then why take the 
trouble?

**M:**&ensp;There is trouble only when you cling to something. When you hold 
on to nothing, no trouble arises. The relinquishing of the lesser is the 
gaining of the greater. Give up all and you gain all. Then life becomes what 
it was meant to be: pure radiation from an inexhaustible source. In that 
light, the world appears dimly like a dream.

**Q:**&ensp;If my world is merely a dream and you are a part of it, what can 
you do for me? If the dream is not real, having no being, how can reality 
affect it?

**M:**&ensp;While it lasts, the dream has temporary being. It is your desire 
to hold on to it that creates the problem. Let go. Stop imagining that the 
dream is yours.

**Q:**&ensp;You seem to take for granted that there can be a dream without a 
dreamer and that I identify myself with the dream of my own sweet will. But I 
am the dreamer and the dream too. Who is to stop dreaming?

**M:**&ensp;Let the dream unroll itself to its very end. You cannot help it. 
But you can look at the dream as a dream and refuse it the stamp of reality.

**Q:**&ensp;Here I am, sitting before you. I am dreaming and you are watching 
me talking in my dream. What is the link between us?

**M:**&ensp;My intention to wake you up is the link. My heart wants you awake. 
I see you suffer in your dream and I know that you must wake up to end your 
woes. When you see your dream as dream, you wake up. But in your dream itself 
I am not interested. It is enough for me to know that you must wake up. You 
need not bring your dream to a definite conclusion or make it noble, happy or 
beautiful; all you need is to realise that you are dreaming. Stop imagining, 
stop believing. See the contradictions, the incongruities, the falsehood and 
the sorrow of the human state, the need to go beyond. Within the immensity of 
space floats a tiny atom of consciousness and in it the entire universe is 
contained.

**Q:**&ensp;There are affections in the dream which seem real and everlasting. 
Do they disappear on waking up?

**M:**&ensp;In dream you love some and not others. On waking up, you find you 
are love itself, embracing all. Personal love, however intense and genuine, 
invariably binds; love in freedom is love of all.

**Q:**&ensp;People come and go. One loves whom one meets; one cannot love all.

**M:**&ensp;When you are love itself, you are beyond time and numbers. In 
loving one, you love all; in loving all, you love each. One and all are not 
exclusive.

**Q:**&ensp;You say you are in a timeless state. Does it mean that past and 
future are open to you? Did you meet Vashishta Muni, Rama’s <span 
data-tippy-content="Spiritual teacher, preceptor.">guru</span>?

**M:**&ensp;The question is in time and about time. Again you are asking me 
about the contents of a dream. Timelessness is beyond the illusion of time; it 
is not an extension in time. He who called himself Vashishta knew Vashishta. I 
am beyond all names and shapes. Vashishta is a dream in your dream. How can I 
know him? You are too much concerned with past and future. It is all due to 
your longing to continue, to protect yourself against extinction. And as you 
want to continue, you want others to keep you company, hence your concern with 
their survival. But what you call survival is but the survival of a dream. 
Death is preferable to it. There is a chance of waking up.

**Q:**&ensp;You are aware of eternity, therefore you are not concerned with 
survival.

**M:**&ensp;It is the other way round. Freedom from all desire is eternity. 
All attachment implies fear, for all things are transient. And fear makes one 
a slave. This freedom from attachment does not come with practice; it is 
natural when one knows one’s true being. Love does not cling; clinging is not 
love.

**Q:**&ensp;So there is no way to gain detachment?

**M:**&ensp;There is nothing to gain. Abandon all imaginings and know yourself 
as you are. Self-knowledge is detachment. All craving is due to a sense of 
insufficiency. When you know that you lack nothing, that all there is is you 
and yours, desire ceases.

**Q:**&ensp;To know myself must I practise awareness?

**M:**&ensp;There is nothing to practise. To know yourself, *be* yourself. To 
be yourself, stop imagining yourself to be this or that. Just *be*. Let your 
true nature emerge. Don’t disturb your mind with seeking.

**Q:**&ensp;It will take much time if I just wait for self-realisation.

**M:**&ensp;What have you to wait for when it is already here and now? You 
have only to look and see. Look at your self, at your own being. You know that 
you *are* and you like it. Abandon all imagining, that is all. Do not rely on 
time. Time is death. Who waits — dies. Life is *now* only. Do not talk to me 
about past and future — they exist only in your mind.

**Q:**&ensp;You too will die.

**M:**&ensp;I am dead already. Physical death will make no difference in my 
case. I am timeless being. I am free of desire and fear because I do not 
remember the past or imagine the future. Where there are no names and shapes, 
how can there be desire and fear? With desirelessness comes timelessness. I am 
safe because what is not cannot touch what is. You feel unsafe because you 
imagine danger. Of course, your body as such is complex and vulnerable and 
needs protection. But not you. Once you realise your own unassailable being, 
you will be at peace.

**Q:**&ensp;How can I find peace when the world suffers?

**M:**&ensp;The world suffers for very valid reasons. If you want to help the 
world, you must be beyond the need of help. Then all your doing as well as not 
doing will help the world most effectively.

**Q:**&ensp;How can non-action be of use where action is needed?

**M:**&ensp;Where action is needed, action happens. Man is not the actor. His 
purpose is to be aware of what is happening. His very presence is action. The 
window is the absence of the wall and it gives air and light because it is 
empty. Be empty of all mental content, of all imagination and effort, and the 
very absence of obstacles will cause reality to rush in. If you really want to 
help a person, keep away. If you are emotionally committed to helping, you 
will fail to help. You may be very busy and be very pleased with your 
charitable nature, but not much will be done. A man is really helped when he 
is no longer in need of help. All else is just futility.

**Q:**&ensp;There is not enough time to sit and wait for help to happen. One 
must do something.

**M:**&ensp;By all means — do. But what you can do is limited; the self alone 
is unlimited. Give limitlessly — of yourself. All else you can give in small 
measures only. You alone are immeasurable. To help is your very nature. Even 
when you eat and drink you help your body. For yourself you need nothing. You 
are pure giving, beginningless, endless, inexhaustible. When you see sorrow 
and suffering, be with it. Do not rush into activity. Neither learning nor 
action can really help. Be with sorrow and lay bare its roots — helping to 
understand is real help.

**Q:**&ensp;My death is nearing.

**M:**&ensp;Your body is short of time, not you. Time and space are in the 
mind only. You are not bound. Just understand yourself — that itself is 
eternity.



<script>
export default {
  props: ["slot-key"],
  mounted () {
    tippy("[data-tippy-content]", {allowHTML: true});
  }
}
</script>