# 79. The Person, The Witness and The Supreme

>Awareness with an object we called witnessing. When there is also 
self-identification with the object, caused by desire or fear, such a state is 
called a person. In reality there is only one state — when distorted by 
self-identification it is called a person; when coloured with the sense of 
being, it is the witness; when colourless and limitless, it is called the 
Supreme.

**Questioner:**&ensp;We have a long history of drug-taking behind us, mostly 
drugs of the consciousness-expanding variety. They gave us the experience of 
other states of consciousness, high and low, and also the conviction that 
drugs are unreliable and, at best, transitory and, at worst, destructive of 
the organism and personality. We are in search of a better means for 
developing consciousness and transcendence. We want the fruits of our search 
to stay with us and enrich our lives instead of turning to pale memories and 
helpless regrets. If by “spiritual” you mean self-investigation and 
development, our purpose in coming to India is definitely spiritual. The happy 
hippy stage is behind us; we are serious now and on the move. We know there is 
reality to be found, but we do not know how to find and hold on to it. We need 
no convincing, only guidance. Can you help us?

****Maharaj:**&ensp;You do not need help, only advice. What you seek is 
already in you. Take my own case. I did nothing for my realisation. My teacher 
told me that the reality is within me; I looked within and found it there, 
exactly as my teacher told me. To see reality is as simple as to see one’s 
face in a mirror. Only the mirror must be clear and true. A quiet mind, 
undistorted by desires and fears, free from ideas and opinions, clear on all 
the levels, is needed to reflect reality. Be clear and quiet, alert and 
detached; all else will happen by itself.

**Q:**&ensp;You had to make your mind clear and quiet before you could realise 
the truth. How did you do it?

**M:**&ensp;I did nothing. It just happened. I lived my life, attending to my 
family’s needs. Nor did my <span data-tippy-content="Spiritual teacher, 
preceptor.">guru</span> do it. It just happened as he said it will.

**Q:**&ensp;Things do not just happen. There must be a cause for everything.

**M:**&ensp;All that happens is the cause of all that happens. Causes are 
numberless; the idea of a sole cause is an illusion.

**Q:**&ensp;You must have been doing something specific — some meditation or 
<span data-tippy-content="One of the six systems of the Hindu philosophy (from 
<em>yoj</em>, to yoke or join). <em>Yoga</em> teaches the means by which the 
individual spirit (<em>jivatma</em>) can be joined or united with the 
universal spirit (<em>Paramatma</em>).">yoga</span>. How can you say that 
realisation will happen on its own?

**M:**&ensp;Nothing specific. I just lived my life.

**Q:**&ensp;I am amazed!

**M:**&ensp;So was I. But what was there to be amazed at? My teacher’s words 
came true. So what? He knew me better than I knew myself, that is all. Why 
search for causes? In the very beginning I was giving some attention and time 
to the sense “I Am”, but only in the beginning. Soon after my *guru* died — I 
lived on. His words proved to be true. That is all. It is all one process. You 
tend to separate things in time and then look for causes.

**Q:**&ensp;What is your work now? What are you doing?

**M:**&ensp;You imagine being and doing as identical. It is not so. The mind 
and the body move and change and cause other minds and bodies to move and 
change and that is called doing or action. I see that it is in the nature of 
action to create further action, like fire that continues by burning. I 
neither act nor cause others to act; I am timelessly aware of what is going on.

**Q:**&ensp;In your mind or also in other minds?

**M:**&ensp;There is only one mind, which swarms with ideas: “I am this”, “I am that”, “this is mine”, “that is mine”. I am not the mind, never was, nor shall be.

**Q:**&ensp;How did the mind come into being?

**M:**&ensp;The world consists of matter, energy and intelligence. They 
manifest themselves in many ways. Desire and imagination create the world and 
intelligence reconciles the two and causes a sense of harmony and peace. To me 
it all happens; I am aware, yet unaffected.

**Q:**&ensp;You cannot be aware, yet unaffected. There is a contradiction in 
terms. Perception is change. Once you have experienced a sensation, memory 
will not allow you to return to the former state.

**M:**&ensp;Yes, what is added to memory cannot be erased easily. But it can 
surely be done and, in fact, I am doing it all the time. Like a bird on its 
wing, I leave no footprints.

**Q:**&ensp;Has the witness name and form, or is it beyond these?

**M:**&ensp;The witness is merely a point in awareness. It has no name and 
form. It is like the reflection of the sun in a drop of dew. The drop of dew 
has name and form, but the little point of light is caused by the sun. The 
clearness and smoothness of the drop is a necessary condition but not 
sufficient by itself. Similarly, clarity and silence of the mind are necessary 
for the reflection of reality to appear in the mind, but by themselves they 
are not sufficient. There must be reality beyond it. Because reality is 
timelessly present, the stress is on the necessary conditions.

**Q:**&ensp;Can it happen that the mind is clear and quiet and yet no 
reflection appears?

**M:**&ensp;There is destiny to consider. The unconscious is in the grip of 
destiny; it is destiny, in fact. One may have to wait. But however heavy may 
be the hand of destiny, it can be lifted by patience and self-control. 
Integrity and purity remove the obstacles and the vision of reality appears in 
the mind.

**Q:**&ensp;How does one gain self-control? I am so weak-minded!

**M:**&ensp;Understand first that you are not the person you believe yourself 
to be. What you think yourself to be is mere suggestion or imagination. You 
have no parents, you were not born, nor will you die. Either trust me when I 
tell you so or arrive at it by study and investigation. The way of total faith 
is quick; the other is slow but steady. Both must be tested in action. Act on 
what you think is true — this is the way to truth.

**Q:**&ensp;Are deserving the truth and destiny one and the same?

**M:**&ensp;Yes, both are in the unconscious. Conscious merit is mere vanity. 
Consciousness is always of obstacles; when there are no obstacles, one goes 
beyond it.

**Q:**&ensp;Will the understanding that I am not the body give me the strength 
of character needed for self-control?

**M:**&ensp;When you know that you are neither body nor mind, you will not be 
swayed by them. You will follow truth wherever it takes you and do what needs 
be done, whatever the price to pay.

**Q:**&ensp;Is action essential for self-realisation?

**M:**&ensp;For realisation, understanding is essential. Action is only 
incidental. A man of steady understanding will not refrain from action. Action 
is the test of truth.

**Q:**&ensp;Are tests needed?

**M:**&ensp;If you do not test yourself all the time, you will not be able to 
distinguish between reality and fancy. Observation and close reasoning help to 
some extent, but reality is paradoxical. How do you know that you have 
realised unless you watch your thoughts and feelings, words and actions, and 
wonder at the changes occurring in you without your knowing why and how? It is 
exactly because they are so surprising that you know that they are real. The 
foreseen and expected is rarely true.

**Q:**&ensp;How does the person come into being?

**M:**&ensp;Exactly as a shadow appears when light is intercepted by the body, so does the person arise when pure self-awareness is obstructed by the “I am the body” idea. And as the shadow changes shape and position according to the lay of the land, so does the person appear to rejoice and suffer, rest and toil, find and lose, according to the pattern of destiny. When the body is no more, the person disappears completely without return; only the witness remains and the Great Unknown.

The witness is that which says, “I know”. The person says “I do”. Now, to say “I know” is not untrue — it is merely limited. But to say “I do” is altogether false because there is nobody who does; all happens by itself, including the idea of being a doer.

**Q:**&ensp;Then what is action?

**M:**&ensp;The universe is full of action, but there is no actor. There are 
numberless persons small and big and very big, who, through identification, 
imagine themselves as acting, but it does not change the fact that the world 
of action (<span data-tippy-content="The great expanse of existence, the 
universe of matter and energy.">mahadakash</span>) is one single whole in 
which all depends on and affects all. The stars affect us deeply and we affect 
the stars. Step back from action to consciousness and leave action to the body 
and the mind; it is their domain. Remain as pure witness until even witnessing 
dissolves in the Supreme.

Imagine a thick jungle full of heavy timber. A plank is shaped out of the 
timber and also a small pencil to write with. The witness reads the writing 
and knows that while the pencil and the plank are distantly related to the 
jungle, the writing has nothing to do with it. It is totally superimposed and 
its disappearance just does not matter. The dissolution of personality is 
followed always by a sense of great relief, as if a heavy burden has fallen 
off.

**Q:**&ensp;When you say, “I am in the state beyond the witness”, what is the 
experience that makes you say so? In what way does it differ from the stage of 
being a witness only?

**M:**&ensp;It is like washing printed cloth. First the design fades, then the 
background and, in the end, the cloth is plain white. The personality gives 
place to the witness, then the witness goes and pure awareness remains. The 
cloth was white in the beginning and is white in the end; the patterns and 
colours just happened — for a time.

**Q:**&ensp;Can there be awareness without an object of awareness?

**M:**&ensp;Awareness with an object we called witnessing. When there is also 
self-identification with the object, caused by desire or fear, such a state is 
called a person. In reality there is only one state  — when distorted by 
self-identification it is called a person; when coloured with the sense of 
being, it is the witness; when colourless and limitless, it is called the 
Supreme.

**Q:**&ensp;I find that I am always restless, longing, hoping, seeking, 
finding, enjoying, abandoning, searching again. What is it that keeps me on 
the boil?

**M:**&ensp;You are really in search of yourself without knowing it. You are 
love-longing for the loveworthy, the perfectly lovable. Due to ignorance you 
are looking for it in the world of opposites and contradictions. When you find 
it within, your search will be over.

**Q:**&ensp;There will be always this sorrowful world to contend with.

**M:**&ensp;Don’t anticipate. You do not know. It is true that all 
manifestation is in the opposites. Pleasure and pain, good and bad, high and 
low, progress and regress, rest and strife — they all come and go together — 
and as long as there is a world, its contradictions will be there. There may 
also be periods of perfect harmony, of bliss and beauty but only for a time. 
What is perfect returns to the source of all perfection and the opposites play 
on.

**Q:**&ensp;How am I to reach perfection?

**M:**&ensp;Keep quiet. Do your work in the world, but inwardly keep quiet. 
Then all will come to you. Do not rely on your work for realisation. It may 
profit others, but not you. Your hope lies in keeping silent in your mind and 
quiet in your heart. Realised people are very quiet.


<script>
export default {
  props: ["slot-key"],
  mounted () {
    tippy("[data-tippy-content]", {allowHTML: true});
  }
}
</script>