# 88. Knowledge by the Mind Is Not True Knowledge

>Do not try to know the truth, for knowledge by the mind is not true 
knowledge. But you can know what is not true, which is enough to liberate you 
from the false.

**Questioner:**&ensp;Do you experience the three states of waking, dreaming 
and sleeping just as we do or otherwise?

**Maharaj:**&ensp;All the three states are sleep to me. My waking state is 
beyond them. As I look at you, you all seem asleep, dreaming up words of your 
own. I am aware, for I imagine nothing. It is not <span 
data-tippy-content="Superconscious state, profound meditation, trance, 
rapturous absorption. A practice of <em>yoga</em> in which the seeker 
(<em>sadhaka</em>) becomes one with the object of his meditation 
(<em>sadhya</em>), thus attaining unqualified bliss. “<em>Samadhi</em> is a 
state in which you transcend the bounds of your body, mind and self-identity, 
and merge into an undifferentiated unity with all that is”.">samadhi</span>, 
which is but a kind of sleep. It is just a state unaffected by the mind, free 
from the past and future. In your case, it is distorted by desire and fear, by 
memories and hopes; in mine, it is as it is — normal. To be a person is to be 
asleep.

**Q:**&ensp;Between the body and pure awareness stands the “inner organ”, <span data-tippy-content="The psyche, mind. Mind in a collective sense, including intelligence (<em>buddhi</em>), ego (<em>ahamkara</em>) and mind (<em>manas</em>).">antahkarana</span>, the “subtle body”, the “mental body”, whatever the name. Just as a whirling mirror converts sunlight into a manifold pattern of streaks and colours, so does the subtle body convert the simple light of the shining Self into a diversified world. Thus I have understood your teaching. What I cannot grasp is how this subtle body arise in the first instance?

**M:**&ensp;It is created with the emergence of the “I Am” idea. The two are one.

**Q:**&ensp;How did the “I Am” appear?

**M:**&ensp;In your world, everything must have a beginning and an end. If it 
does not, you call it eternal. In my view, there is no such thing as a 
beginning or an end — these are all related to time. Timeless being is 
entirely in the *now*.

**Q:**&ensp;The *antahkarana*, or the “subtle body” — is it real or unreal?

**M:**&ensp;It is momentary. Real when present, unreal when over.

**Q:**&ensp;What kind of reality? Is it momentary?

**M:**&ensp;Call it empirical, actual or factual. It is the reality of 
immediate experience, here and now, which cannot be denied. You can question 
the description and the meaning, but not the event itself. Being and non-being 
alternate and their reality is momentary. The Immutable Reality lies beyond 
space and time. Realise the momentariness of being and non-being and be free 
from both.

**Q:**&ensp;Things may be transient, yet they are very much with us, in 
endless repetition.

**M:**&ensp;Desires are strong. It is desire that causes repetition. There is 
no recurrence where desire is not.

**Q:**&ensp;What about fear?

**M:**&ensp;Desire is of the past, fear is of the future. The memory of past 
suffering and the fear of its recurrence make one anxious about the future.

**Q:**&ensp;There is also fear of the unknown.

**M:**&ensp;One who has not suffered is not afraid.

**Q:**&ensp;We are condemned to fear?

**M:**&ensp;Until we can look at fear and accept it as the shadow of personal 
existence, as persons we are bound to be afraid. Abandon all personal 
equations and you shall be free from fear. It is not difficult. Desirelessness 
comes on its own when desire is recognised as false. You need not struggle 
with desire. Ultimately, it is an urge to happiness, which is natural as long 
as there is sorrow. Only see that there is no happiness in what you desire.

**Q:**&ensp;We settle for pleasure.

**M:**&ensp;Each pleasure is wrapped in pain. You soon discover that you 
cannot have one without the other.

**Q:**&ensp;There is the experiencer and there is his experience. What created 
the link between the two?

**M:**&ensp;Nothing created it. It is. The two are one.

**Q:**&ensp;I feel there is a catch somewhere, but I do not know where.

**M:**&ensp;The catch is in your mind, which insists on seeing duality where 
there is none.

**Q:**&ensp;As I listen to you, my mind is all in the now and I am astonished 
to find myself without questions.

**M:**&ensp;You can know reality only when you are astonished.

**Q:**&ensp;I can make out that the cause of anxiety and fear is memory. What 
are the means for putting an end to memory?

**M:**&ensp;Don’t talk of means; there are no means. What you see as false 
dissolves. It is the very nature of illusion to dissolve on investigation. 
Investigate — that is all. You cannot destroy the false, for you are creating 
it all the time. Withdraw from it, ignore it, go beyond, and it will cease to 
be.

**Q:**&ensp;Christ also speaks of ignoring evil and being child-like.

**M:**&ensp;Reality is common to all. Only the false is personal.

**Q:**&ensp;As I watch the <span data-tippy-content="Spiritual aspirant.">sadhaka</span>s and enquire into the theories by which they live, I find they have merely replaced material cravings with “spiritual” ambitions. From what you tell us, it looks as if the words “spiritual” and “ambition” are incompatible. If “spirituality” implies freedom from ambition, what will urge the seeker on? The <span data-tippy-content="One who practices <em>yoga</em>.">yogi</span>s speak of the desire for liberation as essential. Is it not the highest form of ambition?

**M:**&ensp;Ambition is personal; liberation is from the personal. In 
liberation both the subject and the object of ambition are no longer. 
Earnestness is not a yearning for the fruits of one’s endeavours. It is an 
expression of an inner shift of interest away from the false, the unessential, 
the personal.

**Q:**&ensp;You told us the other day that we cannot even dream of perfection 
before realisation, for the Self is the source of all perfections, and not the 
mind. If it is not excellence in virtue that is essential for liberation, 
then what is?

**M:**&ensp;Liberation is not the result of some means skilfully applied, nor 
result of circumstances. It is beyond the causal process. Nothing can compel 
it; nothing can prevent it.

**Q:**&ensp;Then why are we not free here and now?

**M:**&ensp;But we are free “here and now”. It is only the mind that imagines 
bondage.

**Q:**&ensp;What will put an end to imagination?

**M:**&ensp;Why should you want to put an end to it? Once you know your mind 
and its miraculous powers and remove what poisoned it — the idea of a separate 
and isolated person — you just leave it alone to do its work among things to 
which it is well suited. To keep the mind in its own place and on its own work 
is the liberation of the mind.

**Q:**&ensp;What is the work of the mind?

**M:**&ensp;The mind is the wife of the heart and the world their home — to be 
kept bright and happy.

**Q:**&ensp;I have not yet understood why, if nothing stands in the way of 
liberation, it does not happen here and now.

**M:**&ensp;Nothing stands in the way of your liberation and it can happen 
here and now, but for you being more interested in other things. And you 
cannot fight with your interests. You must go with them, see through them and 
watch them reveal themselves as mere errors of judgement and appreciation.

**Q:**&ensp;Will it not help me if I go and stay with some great and holy man?

**M:**&ensp;Great and holy people are always within your reach, but you do not 
recognise them. How will you know who is great and holy? By hearsay? Can you 
trust others in these matters or even yourself? To convince you beyond the 
shadow of a doubt you need more than a commendation, more even than a 
momentary rapture. You may come across a great and holy man or woman and not 
even know for a long time your good fortune. The infant son of a great man for 
many years will not know the greatness of his father. You must mature to 
recognise greatness and purify your heart for holiness. Or you will spend your 
time and money in vain and also miss what life offers you. There are good 
people among your friends — you can learn much from them. Running after saints 
is merely another game to play. Remember yourself instead and watch your daily 
life relentlessly. Be earnest and you shall not fail to break the bonds of 
inattention and imagination.

**Q:**&ensp;Do you want me to struggle all alone?

**M:**&ensp;You are never alone. There are powers and presences who serve you 
all the time most faithfully. You may or may not perceive them; nevertheless 
they are real and active. When you realise that all is in your mind and that 
you are beyond the mind, that you are truly alone, then all is you.

**Q:**&ensp;What is omniscience? Is God omniscient? Are you omniscient? We hear the expression “universal witness” — what does it mean? Does self-realisation imply omniscience? Or is it a matter of specialised training?

**M:**&ensp;To entirely lose all interest in knowledge results in omniscience. 
It is but the gift of knowing what needs to be known at the right moment for 
error-free action. After all, knowledge is needed for action and if you act 
rightly, spontaneously, without bringing in the conscious, so much the better.

**Q:**&ensp;Can one know the mind of another person?

**M:**&ensp;Know you own mind first. It contains the entire universe and with 
room to spare!

**Q:**&ensp;Your working theory seems to be that the waking state is not 
basically different from dreaming and dreamless sleep. The three states are 
essentially a case of mistaken self-identification with the body. Maybe it is 
true, but I feel it is not the whole truth.

**M:**&ensp;Do not try to know the truth, for knowledge by the mind is not 
true knowledge. But you can know what is not true, which is enough to liberate 
you from the false. The idea that you know what is true is dangerous, for it 
keeps you imprisoned in the mind. It is when you do not know that you are free 
to investigate. And there can be no salvation without investigation because 
non-investigation is the main cause of bondage.

**Q:**&ensp;You say that the illusion of the world begins with the sense 
“I Am”, but when I ask about the origin of the sense “I Am”, you answer that 
it has no origin, for on investigation it dissolves. What is solid enough to 
build the world on cannot be mere illusion. The “I Am” is the only changeless 
factor I am conscious of; how can it be false?

**M:**&ensp;It is not the “I Am” that is false, but what you take yourself to 
be. I can see beyond the least shadow of doubt that you are not what you 
believe yourself to be. Logic or no logic, you cannot deny the obvious. You 
are nothing that you are conscious of. Apply yourself diligently to pulling 
apart the structure you have built in your mind. What the mind has done, the 
mind must undo.

**Q:**&ensp;You cannot deny the present moment, mind or no mind. What is now, 
is. You may question the appearance, but not the fact. What is at the root of 
the fact?

**M:**&ensp;The “I Am” is at the root of all appearance and the permanent link 
in the succession of events that we call life; but I am beyond the “I Am”.

**Q:**&ensp;I have found that the realised people usually describe their state 
in terms borrowed from their religion. You happen to be a Hindu, so you talk 
of <span data-tippy-content="One of the gods of the Hindu trinity: Brahma, the 
creator; Vishnu, the preserver; Shiva, the destroyer.">Brahma</span>, <span 
data-tippy-content="One of the Gods of the Hindu trinity — Brahma, the 
creator; Vishnu, the preserver and Shiva, the destroyer.">Vishnu</span> and 
<span data-tippy-content="One of the gods of the Hindu trinity — Brahma, the 
creator; Vishnu, the preserver; and Shiva, the destroyer. Shiva actually means 
auspicious, propitious. Destruction of the cosmos by the god Shiva is a 
propitious act, for destruction precedes creation. Shiva is absolute love of 
the “I-principle” in a man. As a destroyer, he brings about the total 
annihilation of the human ego.">Shiva</span> and use Hindu approaches and 
imagery. Kindly tell us — what is the experience behind your words? What 
reality do they refer to?

**M:**&ensp;It is my way of talking, a language I was taught to use.

**Q:**&ensp;But what is behind the language?

**M:**&ensp;How can I put it into words, except in negating them? Therefore, I use words like “timeless”, “spaceless”, “causeless”. These too are words, but as they are empty of meaning, they suit my purpose.

**Q:**&ensp;If they are meaningless, why use them?

**M:**&ensp;Because you want words where no words apply.

**Q:**&ensp;I can see your point. Again, you have robbed me of my question!


<script>
export default {
  props: ["slot-key"],
  mounted () {
    tippy("[data-tippy-content]", {allowHTML: true});
  }
}
</script>
