# 54. Body and Mind Are Symptoms of Ignorance

>The body and the mind are only symptoms of ignorance, of misapprehension. 
Behave as if you were pure awareness, bodiless and mindless, spaceless and 
timeless, beyond “where” and “when” and “how”. Dwell on it, think of it, learn 
to accept its reality.

**Questioner:**&ensp;One day, we were discussing <span 
data-tippy-content="Person, the outer self.">vyakti</span>, 
<span data-tippy-content="Manifest matter, the evolved nature. Opposite is 
<em>avyakta</em>.">vyakta</span>, <span data-tippy-content="Unmanifest. 
Opposite is <em>vyakta</em>.">avyakta</span> (the person, witness, absolute). 
As far as I remember, you said that the absolute alone is real, and the 
witness is absolute only at a given point of space and time. The person is the 
organism, gross and subtle, illumined by the presence of the witness. I do not 
seem to grasp the matter clearly; could we discuss it again? You also use the 
terms <span data-tippy-content="The great expanse of existence, the universe 
of matter and energy.">mahadakash</span>, <span 
data-tippy-content="[<em>chit</em>, to perceive + <em>akash</em>, expanse, 
sky] Brahman in its aspect of limitless knowledge, the expanse of awareness. 
Variously used for consciousness, individual as well as 
universal.">chidakash</span> and <span data-tippy-content="The great expanse, 
the timeless and spaceless reality; the Absolute being.">paramakash</span>. 
How are they related to “person”, “witness”, and the “absolute”?

**Maharaj:**&ensp;*Mahadakash* is nature, the ocean of existences, the 
physical space with all that can be contacted through the senses. *Chidakash* 
is the expanse of awareness, the mental space of time, perception and 
cognition. *Paramakash* is the timeless and spaceless reality, mindless, 
undifferentiated, the infinite potentiality, the source and origin, the 
substance and the essence, both matter and consciousness — yet beyond both. It 
cannot be perceived, but can be experienced as ever witnessing the witness, 
perceiving the perceiver, the origin and the end of all manifestation, the 
root of time and space, the prime cause in every chain of causation.

**Q:**&ensp;What is the difference between *vyakta* and *avyakta*?

**M:**&ensp;There is no difference. It is like light and daylight. The universe is full of light which you do not see, but the same light you see as daylight. And what the daylight reveals is the *vyakti*. The person is always the object, the witness is the subject, and their relation of mutual dependence is the reflection of their absolute identity. You imagine that they are distinct and separate states. They are not. They are the same consciousness at rest and in movement, each state conscious of the other. In <span data-tippy-content="Universal consciousness.">chit</span> man knows God and God knows man. In *chit* the man shapes the world and the world shapes man. *Chit* is the link, the bridge between extremes, the balancing and uniting factor in every experience. The totality of the perceived is what you call “matter”. The totality of all perceivers is what you call the “universal mind”. The identity of the two, manifesting itself as perceptibility and perceiving, harmony and intelligence, loveliness and loving, reässerts itself eternally.

**Q:**&ensp;The three <span data-tippy-content="Attributes, qualities. In 
<em>Samkhya</em> philosophy the three attributes of the cosmic substance 
(<em>prakriti</em>) are: illuminating (<em>sattva</em>), activating 
(<em>rajas</em>) and restraining (<em>tamas</em>).">guna</span>s — <span 
data-tippy-content="Being, existence, true essence. In <em>yoga</em> the 
quality of purity or goodness.">sattva</span>, <span 
data-tippy-content="Motivity, activity, energy. One of the three 
<em>guna</em>s or qualities of matter: <em>sattva</em>, <em>rajas</em> and 
<em>tamas</em>. In <em>yoga</em>, egoism.">rajas</span>, <span 
data-tippy-content="Darkness, inertia, passivity. One of the three 
constituents (<em>guna</em>s) of the cosmic substance: <em>sattva</em>, 
<em>rajas</em> and <em>tamas</em>.">tamas</span> — are they only in matter or 
also in the mind?

**M:**&ensp;In both, of course, because the two are not separate. It is only 
the absolute that is beyond *guna*s. In fact, these are but points of view, 
ways of looking. They exist only in the mind. Beyond the mind, all 
distinctions cease.

**Q:**&ensp;Is the universe a product of the senses?

**M:**&ensp;Just as you recreate your world on waking up, so is the universe 
unrolled. The mind with its five organs of perception, five organs of action, 
and five vehicles of consciousness appears as memory, thought, reason and 
selfhood.

**Q:**&ensp;The sciences have made much progress. We know the body and the 
mind much better than our ancestors did. Your traditional way, describing and 
analysing mind and matter, is no longer valid.

**M:**&ensp;But where are your scientists with their sciences? Are they not 
again images in your own mind?

**Q:**&ensp;Here lies the basic difference! To me they are not my own 
projections. They were before I was born and shall be there when I am dead.

**M:**&ensp;Of course. Once you accept time and space as real, you will 
consider yourself minute and short-lived. But are they real? Do they depend on 
you or you on them? As body, you are in space. As mind, you are in time. But 
are you mere body with a mind in it? Have you ever investigated?

**Q:**&ensp;I had neither the motive nor the method.

**M:**&ensp;I am suggesting both. But the actual work of insight and 
detachment (<span data-tippy-content="Discrimination; discrimination between 
the true and the false, the real and the unreal. <em>Viveka</em> is an 
expression of the spiritual consciousness hidden behind the mind. It leads to 
<em>vairagya</em>.">viveka</span>–<span data-tippy-content="Dispassion, 
indifference to the pains and pleasures of the material 
world.">vairagya</span>) is yours.

**Q:**&ensp;The only motive I can perceive is my own causeless and timeless 
happiness. And what is the method?

**M:**&ensp;Happiness is incidental. The true and effective motive is love. 
You see people suffer and you seek the best way of helping them. The answer is 
obvious — first put yourself beyond the need of help. Be sure your attitude is 
of pure goodwill, free of expectation of any kind. 

Those who seek mere happiness may end up in sublime indifference, while love 
will never rest. 

As to the method, there is only one: you must come to know yourself, both what 
you appear to be and what you *are*. Clarity and charity go together — each 
needs and strengthens the other.

**Q:**&ensp;Compassion implies the existence of an objective world, full of 
avoidable sorrow.

**M:**&ensp;The world is not objective and the sorrow of it is not avoidable. 
Compassion is but another word for the refusal to suffer for imaginary reasons.

**Q:**&ensp;If the reasons are imaginary, why should the suffering be 
inevitable?

**M:**&ensp;It is always the false that makes you suffer, the false desires 
and fears, the false values and ideas, the false relationships between people. 
Abandon the false and you are free of pain; truth makes happy, truth liberates.

**Q:**&ensp;The truth is that I am a mind imprisoned in a body and this is a 
very unhappy truth.

**M:**&ensp;You are neither the body nor in the body — there is no such thing 
as the body. You have grievously misunderstood yourself; to understand 
rightly, investigate.

**Q:**&ensp;But I was born as a body, in a body and shall die with the body, 
as a body.

**M:**&ensp;This is your misconception. Enquire, investigate, doubt yourself 
and others. To find truth, you must not cling to your convictions; if you are 
sure of the immediate, you will never reach the ultimate. Your idea that you 
were born and that you will die is absurd — both logic and experience 
contradict it.

**Q:**&ensp;All right — I shall not insist that I am the body. You have a 
point here. But here and now, as I talk to you, I am in the body — obviously. 
The body may not be me, but it is mine.

**M:**&ensp;The entire universe contributes incessantly to your existence. 
Hence the entire universe is your body. In that sense, I agree.

**Q:**&ensp;My body influences me deeply. In more than one way, my body is my 
destiny. My character, my moods, the nature of my reäctions, my desires and 
fears — inborn or acquired — they are all based on the body. A little alcohol, 
some drug or other and all changes. Until the drug wears off I become another 
man.

**M:**&ensp;All this happens because you think yourself to be the body. 
Realise your real self and even drugs will have no power over you.

**Q:**&ensp;Do you smoke?

**M:**&ensp;My body has kept a few habits which may as well continue until it 
dies. There is no harm in them.

**Q:**&ensp;Do you eat meat?

**M:**&ensp;I was born among meat-eating people and my children eat meat. I 
eat very little — and make no fuss.

**Q:**&ensp;Meat-eating implies killing.

**M:**&ensp;Obviously. I make no claims of consistency. You think absolute 
consistency is possible; prove it by example. Don’t preach what you do not 
practise. 

Coming back to the idea of having been born: You are stuck with what your 
parents told you, all about conception, pregnancy and birth, infant, child, 
youngster, teenager, and so on. Now, divest yourself of the idea that you are 
the body with the help of the contrary idea that you are not the body. It is 
also an idea, no doubt; treat it like something to be abandoned when its work 
is done. The idea that I am not the body gives reality to the body when in 
fact, there is no such thing as the body; it is but a state of mind. You can 
have as many and as diverse bodies as you like; just remember steadily what 
you want and reject the incompatibles.

**Q:**&ensp;I am like a box within a box, within a box, the outer box acting 
as the body and the one next to it as the indwelling soul. Abstract the outer 
box and the next becomes the body and the one next to it the soul. It is an 
infinite series, an endless opening of boxes; is the last one the ultimate 
soul?

**M:**&ensp;If you have a body, you must have a soul; here your simile of a 
nest of boxes applies. But here and now, through all your bodies and souls 
shines awareness, the pure light of *chit*. Hold on to it unswervingly. 
Without awareness, the body would not last a second. There is in the body a 
current of energy, affection and intelligence, which guides, maintains and 
energises the body. Discover that current and stay with it. 

Of course, all these are manners of speaking. Words are as much a barrier as a 
bridge. Find the spark of life that weaves the tissues of your body and be 
with it. It is the only reality the body has.

**Q:**&ensp;What happens to that spark of life after death?

**M:**&ensp;It is beyond time. Birth and death are but points in time. Life 
weaves eternally its many webs. The weaving is in time, but life itself is 
timeless. Whatever name and shape you give to its expressions, it is like the 
ocean — never changing, ever changing.

**Q:**&ensp;All you say sounds beautifully convincing, yet my feeling of being 
just a person in a world strange and alien, often inimical and dangerous, does 
not cease. Being a person limited in space and time, how can I possibly 
realise myself as the opposite: a depersonalised, universalised awareness of 
nothing in particular?

**M:**&ensp;You assert yourself to be what you are not and deny yourself to be 
what you are. You omit the element of pure cognition, of awareness free from 
all personal distortions. Unless you admit the reality of *chit*, you will 
never know yourself.

**Q:**&ensp;What am I to do? I do not see myself as you see me. Maybe you are 
right and I am wrong, but how can I cease to be what I feel I am?

**M:**&ensp;A prince who believes himself to be a beggar can be convinced 
conclusively in one way only: he must behave as a prince and see what happens. 
Behave as if what I say is true and judge by what actually happens. All I ask 
is the little faith needed for making the first step. With experience will 
come confidence and you will not need me any more. I know what you are and I 
am telling you. Trust me for a while.

**Q:**&ensp;To be here and now, I need my body and its senses. To understand, 
I need a mind.

**M:**&ensp;The body and the mind are only symptoms of ignorance, of 
misapprehension. Behave as if you are pure awareness, bodiless and mindless, 
spaceless and timeless, beyond “where” and “when” and “how”. Dwell on it, 
think of it, learn to accept its reality. Don’t oppose it and deny it all the 
time. Keep an open mind at least. <span data-tippy-content="One of the six 
systems of the Hindu philosophy (from <em>yoj</em>, to yoke or join). 
<em>Yoga</em> teaches the means by which the individual spirit 
(<em>jivatma</em>) can be joined or united with the universal spirit 
(<em>Paramatma</em>).">Yoga</span> is bending the outer to the inner. Make 
your mind and body express the real which is all and beyond all. By doing you 
succeed, not by arguing.

**Q:**&ensp;Kindly allow me to come back to my first question. How does the 
error of being a person originate?

**M:**&ensp;The absolute precedes time. Awareness comes first. A bundle of 
memories and mental habits attracts attention, awareness gets focalised, and a 
person suddenly appears. Remove the light of awareness, go to sleep or swoon 
away — and the person disappears. The person (*vyakti*) flickers, awareness 
(*vyakta*) contains all space and time, the absolute (*avyakta*) — *is*.


<script>
export default {
  props: ["slot-key"],
  mounted () {
    tippy("[data-tippy-content]", {allowHTML: true});
  }
}
</script>