# 82. Absolute Perfection Is Here and Now

>Time cannot take us out of time, as space cannot take us out of space. All 
you get by waiting is more waiting. Absolute perfection is here and now, not 
in some future, near or far. The secret is in action — here and now.

**Questioner:**&ensp;The war is on. What is your attitude toward it?

**Maharaj:**&ensp;In some place or another, in some form or other, war is 
always on. Was there a time when there was no war? Some say it is the will of 
God. Some say it is God’s play. It is another way of saying that wars are 
inevitable and nobody is responsible.

**Q:**&ensp;But what is your own attitude?

**M:**&ensp;Why impose attitudes on me? I have no attitude to call my own.

**Q:**&ensp;Surely somebody is responsible for this horrible and senseless 
carnage. Why do people kill each other so readily?

**M:**&ensp;Search for the culprit within. The ideas of ‘me’ and ‘mine’ are at 
the root of all conflict. Be free of them and you will be out of conflict.

**Q:**&ensp;What of it if I am out of conflict? It will not affect the war. If 
I am the cause of war, I am ready to be destroyed. Yet it stands to reason 
that the disappearance of a thousand like me will not stop wars. They did not 
start with my birth nor will they end with my death. I am not responsible. Who 
is?

**M:**&ensp;Strife and struggle are a part of existence. Why don’t you enquire 
who is responsible for existence?

**Q:**&ensp;Why do you say that existence and conflict are inseparable? Can 
there be no existence without strife? I need not fight others to be myself.

**M:**&ensp;You fight others all the time for your survival as a separate 
body–mind, a particular name and form. To live you must destroy. From the 
moment you were conceived you started a war with your environment — a 
merciless war of mutual extermination, until death sets you free.

**Q:**&ensp;My question remains unanswered. You are merely describing what I 
know — life and its sorrows. But who is responsible you do not say. When I 
press you, you throw the blame on God, <span data-tippy-content="Action or 
“the fruits of action”. <em>Karma</em> is of three kinds: <em>sanchita</em> 
(accumulated from previous births), <em>prarabdha</em> (portion of the past 
<em>karma</em> to be worked out in the present life) and <em>agami</em> (the 
current <em>karma</em> the result of which will fructify in 
future).">karma</span>, or on my own greed and fear — which merely invites 
further questions. Give me the final answer.

**M:**&ensp;The final answer is this: nothing is. All is a momentary 
appearance in the field of universal consciousness; continuity as name and 
form is a mental formation only, easy to dispel.

**Q:**&ensp;I am asking about the immediate, the transitory, the appearance. 
Here is a picture of a child killed by soldiers. It is a fact — staring at 
you. You cannot deny it. Now, who is responsible for the death of the child?

**M:**&ensp;Nobody and everybody. The world is what it contains and each thing 
affects all others. We all kill the child and we all die with it. Every event 
has innumerable causes and produces numberless effects. It is useless to keep 
accounts; nothing is traceable.

**Q:**&ensp;Your people speak of *karma* and retribution.

**M:**&ensp;It is merely a gross approximation. In reality we are all creators 
and creatures of each other, causing and bearing each other’s burden.

**Q:**&ensp;So the innocent suffers for the guilty?

**M:**&ensp;In our ignorance we are innocent; in our actions we are guilty. We 
sin without knowing and suffer without understanding. Our only hope is to 
stop, to look, to understand and to get out of the traps of memory. For memory 
feeds imagination and imagination generates desire and fear.

**Q:**&ensp;Why do I imagine at all?

**M:**&ensp;The light of consciousness passes through the film of memory and 
throws pictures on your brain. Because of the deficient and disordered state 
of your brain, what you perceive is distorted and coloured by feelings of 
like and dislike. Make your thinking orderly and free from emotional overtones 
and you will see people and things as they are with clarity and charity. 

The witness of birth, life and death is one and the same. It is the witness of 
pain and of love. For while the existence in limitation and separation is 
sorrowful, we love it. We love it and hate it at the same time. We fight, we 
kill, we destroy life and property and yet we are affectionate and 
self-sacrificing. We nurse the child tenderly and orphan it too. Our life is 
full of contradictions. Yet we cling to it. This clinging is at the root of 
everything. Still, it is entirely superficial. We hold on to something or 
somebody with all our might and the next moment we forget about it; like a 
child that shapes its mud-pies and abandons them light-heartedly. Touch them 
and he will scream with anger; divert the child and he forgets them. For our 
life is *now*, and the love of it is *now*. We love variety; the play of pain 
and pleasure, we are fascinated by contrasts. For this we need the opposites 
and their apparent separation. We enjoy them for a time and then get tired and 
crave for the peace and silence of pure being. The cosmic heart beats 
ceaselessly. I am the witness and the heart too.

**Q:**&ensp;I can see the picture, but who is the painter? Who is responsible 
for this terrible and yet adorable experience?

**M:**&ensp;The painter is in the picture. You separate the painter from the 
picture and look for him. Don’t separate and don’t put false questions. Things 
are as they are and nobody in particular is responsible. The idea of personal 
responsibility comes from the illusion of agency. “Somebody must have done it, 
somebody is responsible”. Society as it is now, with its framework of laws and 
customs, is based on the idea of a separate and responsible personality, but 
this is not the only form a society can take. There may be other forms where 
the sense of separation is weak and responsibility diffused.

**Q:**&ensp;An individual with a weak sense of personality — is he nearer 
self-realisation?

**M:**&ensp;Take the case of a young child. The sense of ‘I am’ is not yet 
formed; the personality is rudimentary. The obstacles to self knowledge are 
few, but the power and the clarity of awareness, its width and depth are 
lacking. In the course of years awareness will grow stronger, but also the 
latent personality will emerge and obscure and complicate. Just as the harder 
the wood, the hotter the flame, so the stronger the personality, the brighter 
the light generated from its destruction.

**Q:**&ensp;Have you no problems?

**M:**&ensp;I do have problems. I told you already. To be, to exist with a 
name and form is painful, yet I love it.

**Q:**&ensp;But you love everything!

**M:**&ensp;In existence everything is contained. My very nature is to love; 
even the painful is lovable.

**Q:**&ensp;It does not make it less painful. Why not remain in the unlimited?

**M:**&ensp;It is the instinct of exploration, the love of the unknown, that 
brings me into existence. It is in the nature of being to see adventure in 
becoming, as it is in the very nature of becoming to seek peace in being. This 
alteration of being and becoming is inevitable, but my home is beyond.

**Q:**&ensp;Is your home in God?

**M:**&ensp;To love and worship a god is also ignorance. My home is beyond all 
notions, however sublime.

**Q:**&ensp;But God is not a notion! It is the reality beyond existence.

**M:**&ensp;You may use any word you like. Whatever you may think of, I am 
beyond it.

**Q:**&ensp;Once you know your home, why not stay in it? What takes you out of it?

**M:**&ensp;Out of love for corporate existence one is born and once born, one 
gets involved in destiny. Destiny is inseparable from becoming. The desire to 
be the particular makes you into a person with all its personal past and 
future. Look at some great man — what a wonderful man he was! And yet how 
troubled was his life and how limited its fruits. How utterly dependent is the 
personality of man and how indifferent is its world. And yet we love it and 
protect it for its very insignificance.

**Q:**&ensp;The war is on and there is chaos and you are being asked to take 
charge of a feeding centre. You are given what is needed; it is only a 
question of getting through the job. Will you refuse it?

**M:**&ensp;To work or not to work is one and the same to me. I may take 
charge or may not. There may be others better endowed for such tasks than I am 
— professional caterers for instance. But my attitude is different. I do not 
look at death as a calamity, as I do not rejoice at the birth of a child. The 
child is out for trouble while the dead is out of it. Attachment to life is 
attachment to sorrow. We love what gives us pain. Such is our nature. For me 
the moment of death will be a moment of jubilation, not of fear. I cried when 
I was born and I shall die laughing.

**Q:**&ensp;What is the change in consciousness at the moment of death?

**M:**&ensp;What change do you expect? When the film projection ends, all 
remains the same as when it started. The state before you were born was also 
the state after death, if you remember.

**Q:**&ensp;I remember nothing.

**M:**&ensp;Because you never tried. It is only a question of tuning-in the 
mind. It requires training, of course.

**Q:**&ensp;Why don’t you take part in social work?

**M:**&ensp;But I am doing nothing else all the time! And what is the social 
work you want me to do? Patchwork is not for me. My stand is clear: produce to 
distribute, feed before you eat, give before you take, think of others before 
you think of yourself. Only a selfless society based on sharing can be stable 
and happy. This is the only practical solution. If you do not want it, fight.

**Q:**&ensp;It is all a matter of <span data-tippy-content="Attributes, 
qualities. In <em>Samkhya</em> philosophy the three attributes of the cosmic 
substance (<em>prakriti</em>) are: illuminating (<em>sattva</em>), activating 
(<em>rajas</em>) and restraining (<em>tamas</em>).">guna</span>s. Where <span 
data-tippy-content="Darkness, inertia, passivity. One of the three 
constituents (<em>guna</em>s) of the cosmic substance: <em>sattva</em>, 
<em>rajas</em> and <em>tamas</em>.">tamas</span> and <span 
data-tippy-content="Motivity, activity, energy. One of the three 
<em>guna</em>s or qualities of matter: <em>sattva</em>, <em>rajas</em> and 
<em>tamas</em>. In <em>yoga</em>, egoism.">rajas</span> predominate, there 
must be war. Where <span data-tippy-content="Being, existence, true essence. 
In <em>yoga</em> the quality of purity or goodness.">sattva</span> rules, 
there will be peace.

**M:**&ensp;Put it whichever way you like, it comes to the same. Society is 
built on motives. Put goodwill into the foundations and you will not need 
specialised social workers.

**Q:**&ensp;The world is getting better.

**M:**&ensp;The world had all the time to get better, yet it did not. What 
hope is there for the future? Of course, there have been and will be periods 
of harmony and peace, when *sattva* was in ascendance, but things get 
destroyed by their own perfection. A perfect society is necessarily static and 
therefore it stagnates and decays. From the summit all roads lead downwards. 
Societies are like people — they are born, they grow to some point of relative 
perfection and then decay and die.

**Q:**&ensp;Is there not a state of absolute perfection which does not decay?

**M:**&ensp;Whatever has a beginning must have an end. In the timeless all is 
perfect, here and now.

**Q:**&ensp;But shall we reach the timeless in due course?

**M:**&ensp;In due course we shall come back to the starting point. Time 
cannot take us out of time, as space cannot take us out of space. All you get 
by waiting is more waiting. Absolute perfection is here and now, not in some 
future, near or far. The secret is in action — here and now. It is your 
behaviour that blinds you to yourself. Disregard whatever you think yourself 
to be and act as if you were absolutely perfect — whatever your idea of 
perfection may be. All you need is courage.

**Q:**&ensp;Where do I find such courage?

**M:**&ensp;In yourself, of course. Look within.

**Q:**&ensp;Your grace will help.

**M:**&ensp;My grace is telling you now: Look within. All you need you have. 
Use it. Behave as best you know; do what you think you should. Don’t be afraid 
of mistakes; you can always correct them; only intentions matter. The shape 
things take is not within your power; the motives of your actions are.

**Q:**&ensp;How can action born from imperfection lead to perfection?

**M:**&ensp;Action does not lead to perfection; perfection is expressed in 
action. As long as you judge yourself by your expressions, give them your 
utmost attention; when you realise your own being, your behaviour will be 
perfect — spontaneously.

**Q:**&ensp;If I am timelessly perfect, then why was I born at all? What is 
the purpose of this life?

**M:**&ensp;It is like asking, “What does it profit gold to be made into an 
ornament?”. The ornament gets the
colour and the beauty of gold; the gold is not enriched. Similarly, reality 
expressed in action makes the action meaningful and beautiful.

**Q:**&ensp;What does the real gain through its expressions?

**M:**&ensp;What can it gain? Nothing whatsoever. But it is in the nature of 
love to express itself, to affirm itself, to overcome difficulties. Once you 
have understood that the world is love in action, you will look at it quite 
differently. But first your attitude to suffering must change. Suffering is 
primarily a call for attention, which itself is a movement of love. More than 
happiness, love wants growth, the widening and deepening of consciousness and 
being. Whatever prevents becomes a cause of pain and love does not shirk from 
pain. *Sattva*, the energy that works for righteousness and orderly 
development, must not be thwarted. When obstructed it turns against itself and 
becomes destructive. Whenever love is withheld and suffering allowed to 
spread, war becomes inevitable. Our indifference to our neighbour’s sorrow 
brings suffering to our door.


<script>
export default {
  props: ["slot-key"],
  mounted () {
    tippy("[data-tippy-content]", {allowHTML: true});
  }
}
</script>