# 87. Keep the Mind Silent and You shall Discover

>Cease looking for happiness and reality in a dream and you will wake up. You 
need not know all the “why” and “how”; there is no end to questions. Abandon 
all desires, keep your mind silent and you shall discover.

**Questioner:**&ensp;Once I had a strange experience. I was not, nor was the 
world. There was only light — within and without — and immense peace. This 
lasted for four days and then I returned to the everyday consciousness. 

Now I have a feeling that all I know is merely scaffolding, covering and hiding the building under construction. Of the architect, the design, the plans, the purpose — I know nothing. Some activity is going on, things are happening; that is all I can say. I am that scaffolding, some thing very flimsy and short-lived. When the building is ready, the scaffolding will be dismantled and removed. The “I Am” and “What am I?” are of no importance because once the building is ready, the “I” will go as a matter of course, leaving no questions about itself to answer.

**Maharaj:**&ensp;Are you not aware of all this? Is not the fact of awareness 
the constant factor?

**Q:**&ensp;My sense of permanency and identity is due to memory, which is so 
evanescent and unreliable. How little I remember, even of the recent past! I 
have lived a lifetime, and now what is left with me? A bundle of events, at 
best a short story.

**M:**&ensp;All this takes place within your consciousness.

**Q:**&ensp;Within and without. In daytime, within; at night, without. 
Consciousness is not all. So many things happen beyond its reach. To say that 
what I am not conscious of does not exist is altogether wrong.

**M:**&ensp;What you say is logical, but actually you know only what is in 
your consciousness. What you claim exists outside conscious experience is 
inferred.

**Q:**&ensp;It may be inferred and yet it is more real than the sensory.

**M:**&ensp;Be careful. The moment you start talking, you create a verbal 
universe; a universe of words, ideas, concepts and abstractions, interwoven 
and interdependent, most wonderfully generating, supporting and explaining 
each other and yet all without essence or substance, mere creations of the 
mind. Words create words; reality is silent.

**Q:**&ensp;When you talk, I hear you. Is it not a fact?

**M:**&ensp;That you hear is a fact. What you hear is not. The fact can be 
experienced, and in that sense the sound of the word and the mental ripples it 
causes are experienced. There is no other reality behind it. Its meaning is 
purely conventional, to be remembered; a language can be easily forgotten 
unless practiced.

**Q:**&ensp;If words have no reality in them, why talk at all?

**M:**&ensp;They serve their limited purpose of inter-personal communication. 
Words do not convey facts, they signal them. Once you are beyond the person, 
you need no words.

**Q:**&ensp;What can take me beyond the person? How does one go beyond 
consciousness?

**M:**&ensp;Words and questions come from the mind and hold you there. To go 
beyond the mind, you must be silent and quiet. Peace and silence, silence and 
peace — this is the way beyond. Stop asking questions.

**Q:**&ensp;Once I give up asking questions, what am I to do?

**M:**&ensp;What can you do but wait and watch?

**Q:**&ensp;What am I to wait for?

**M:**&ensp;For the centre of your being to emerge into consciousness. The 
three states of sleeping, dreaming and waking are all in consciousness, the 
manifested; what you call “consciousness” will also be manifested in time; 
beyond consciousness altogether lies the unmanifested. And beyond all and 
pervading all is the heart of being, which beats steadily — 
manifested–unmanifested, manifested–unmanifested (<span 
data-tippy-content="Manifested condition with the three <em>guna</em>s, 
qualities — <em>sattva</em>, <em>rajas</em> and <em>tamas</em>. The Supreme 
Absolute conceived of as possessing qualities like love, mercy and so forth, as 
distinguished from the undifferentiated Absolute of the <em>Advaita 
Vedanta</em>.">saguna</span>–<span data-tippy-content="The unconditioned, 
without form, qualities or attributes.">nirguna</span>).

**Q:**&ensp;On the verbal level, it sounds all right. I can visualise myself 
as the seed of being, a point in consciousness, with my sense “I Am” 
pulsating, appearing and disappearing alternately. But what am I to do to 
realise it as a fact, to go beyond into the changeless, wordless Reality?

**M:**&ensp;You can do nothing. What time has brought about, time will take 
away.

**Q:**&ensp;Why then all these exhortations to practice <span 
data-tippy-content="One of the six systems of the Hindu philosophy 
(from <em>yoj</em>, to yoke or join). <em>Yoga</em> teaches the means by which 
the individual spirit (<em>jivatma</em>) can be joined or united with the 
universal spirit (<em>Paramatma</em>).">yoga</span> and seek reality? They 
make me feel empowered and responsible, while in fact it is time that does all.

**M:**&ensp;This is the end of *yoga* — to realise independence. All that 
happens, happens in and to the mind, not to the source of the “I Am”. Once you 
realise that all happens by itself (call it destiny, the will of God or mere 
accident), you remain as witness only, understanding and enjoying, but not 
perturbed.

**Q:**&ensp;If I cease trusting words altogether, what will my condition be?

**M:**&ensp;There is a season for trusting and for distrusting. Let the 
seasons do their work; why worry?

**Q:**&ensp;Somehow I feel responsible for what happens around me.

**M:**&ensp;You are responsible only for what you can change. All you can 
change is only your attitude. There lies your responsibility.

**Q:**&ensp;You are advising me to remain indifferent to the sorrows of others!

**M:**&ensp;It is not that you are indifferent. All the sufferings of mankind 
do not prevent you from enjoying your next meal. The witness is not 
indifferent. He is the fullness of understanding and compassion. Only as the 
witness you can help another.

**Q:**&ensp;All my life I was fed on words. The number of words I have heard 
and read goes into the billions. Did it benefit me? Not at all!

**M:**&ensp;The mind shapes the language and the language shapes the mind. 
Both are tools — use them, but don’t misuse them. Words can only bring you up 
to their own limit; to go beyond, you must abandon them. Remain as the silent 
witness only.

**Q:**&ensp;How can I? The world disturbs me greatly.

**M:**&ensp;It is because you think yourself big enough to be affected by the 
world. It is not so. You are so small that nothing can pin you down. It is 
your mind that gets caught, not you. Know yourself as you *are* — a mere point 
in consciousness, dimensionless and timeless. You are like the point of the 
pencil — by mere contact with you, the mind draws its picture of the world. 
You are single and simple — the picture is complex and extensive. Don’t be 
misled by the picture — remain aware of the tiny point which is everywhere in 
the picture. 

What is, can cease to be; what is not can come to be; but what neither is nor 
is not, but on which being and non-being depend, is unassailable; know 
yourself to be the cause of desire and fear, itself free from both.

**Q:**&ensp;How am I the cause of fear?

**M:**&ensp;All depends on you. It is by your consent that the world exists. 
Withdraw your belief in its reality and it will dissolve like a dream. Time 
can bring down mountains; much more can be done by you who are the timeless 
source of time. For without memory and expectation there can be no time.

**Q:**&ensp;Is the “I Am” the Ultimate?

**M:**&ensp;Before you can say, “I am”, you must be there to say it. Being 
need not be self-conscious. You need not know to be, but you must *be* to know.

**Q:**&ensp;Sir, I am getting drowned in a sea of words! I can see that all 
depends on how the words are put together, but there must be somebody to put 
them together — meaningfully. By drawing words at random, the *Ramayana*, 
*Mahabharata* and *Bhagavata* could never be produced. The theory of 
accidental emergence is not tenable. The origin of the meaningful must be 
beyond it. What is that power that creates order out of chaos? Living is more 
than being, and consciousness is more than living. Who is the conscious living 
being?

**M:**&ensp;Your question contains the answer: a conscious living being is a conscious living being. The words are most appropriate, but you do not grasp their full import. Go deep into the meaning of the words “being”, “living” and “conscious”, and you will stop running in circles and asking questions, but missing answers. Do understand that you cannot ask a valid question about yourself because you do not know whom you are asking about. In the question, “Who am I?”, the “I” is not known and the question can be worded as, “I do not know what I mean by ‘I’”. What you are, you must find out. I can only tell you what you are not. You are not of the world; you are not even in the world. The world is not; you alone are. You create the world in your imagination like a dream. As you cannot separate the dream from yourself, so you cannot have an outer world independent of yourself. You are independent, not the world. Don’t be afraid of a world you yourself have created. Cease from looking for happiness and reality in a dream and you will wake up. You need not know “why” and “how”; there is no end to questions. Abandon all desires, keep your mind silent and you shall discover.


<script>
export default {
  props: ["slot-key"],
  mounted () {
    tippy("[data-tippy-content]", {allowHTML: true});
  }
}
</script>