# 57. Beyond Mind There Is No Suffering

>Pain is physical; suffering is mental. Beyond the mind there is no suffering. 
Pain is merely a signal that the body is in danger and requires attention. … 
Suffering is due entirely to clinging or resisting; it is a sign of our 
unwillingness to move on, to flow with life.

**Questioner:**&ensp;I see you sitting in your son’s house waiting for lunch 
to be served, and I wonder whether the content of your consciousness is 
similar to mine or partly different or totally different. Are you hungry and 
thirsty as I am, waiting rather impatiently for the meals to be served, or are 
you in an altogether different state of mind?

**Maharaj:**&ensp;There is not much difference on the surface, but very much 
of it in depth. You know yourself only through the senses and the mind. You 
take yourself to be what they suggest; having no direct knowledge of yourself, 
you have mere ideas; all mediocre, second-hand, by hearsay. Whatever you think 
you are, you take it to be true; the habit of imagining yourself perceivable 
and describable is very strong with you. 

I see as you see, hear as you hear, taste as you taste, eat as you eat. I also 
feel thirst and hunger and expect my food to be served on time. When starved 
or sick, my body and mind go weak. All this I perceive quite clearly, but 
somehow I am not in it, I feel myself as if floating over it; aloof and 
detached. Even not aloof and detached — there is aloofness and detachment as 
there is thirst and hunger; there is also the awareness of it all and a sense 
of immense distance, as if the body and the mind and all that happens to them 
were somewhere far out on the horizon. I am like a cinema screen, clear and 
empty — the pictures pass over it and disappear, leaving it as clear and empty 
as before. In no way is the screen affected by the pictures, nor are the 
pictures affected by the screen. The screen intercepts and reflects the 
pictures, it does not shape them. It has nothing to do with the reels of 
films. These are as they are, lumps of destiny (<span 
data-tippy-content="Destiny, <em>sanchita karma</em> (karma of past lives) 
that has become the destiny in the present life.">prarabdha</span>) — but not 
my destiny, the destinies of the people on the screen.

**Q:**&ensp;You do not mean to say that the people in a picture have 
destinies! They belong to the story; the story is not theirs.

**M:**&ensp;And what about you? Do you shape your life or are you shaped by it?

**Q:**&ensp;Yes, you are right. A life story unrolls itself, of which I am one 
of the actors. I have no being outside it, as it has no being without me. I am 
merely a character, not a person.

**M:**&ensp;The character will become a person when he begins to shape his 
life instead of accepting it as it comes and identifying himself with it.

**Q:**&ensp;When I ask a question and you answer, what exactly happens?

**M:**&ensp;The question and the answer — both appear on the screen. The lips 
move, the body speaks — and again the screen is clear and empty.

**Q:**&ensp;When you say, “clear and empty”, what do you mean?

**M:**&ensp;I mean free of all contents. To myself I am neither perceivable nor conceivable; there is nothing I can point out and say, “This I am”. You identify yourself with everything so easily, I find it impossible. The feeling, “I am not this or that, nor is anything mine” is so strong in me that as soon as a thing or a thought appears, there comes at once the sense “this I am not”.

**Q:**&ensp;Do you mean to say that you spend your time repeating, “this I am 
not, that I am not”?

**M:**&ensp;Of course not. I am merely verbalising for your sake. By the grace 
of my <span data-tippy-content="Spiritual teacher, preceptor.">guru</span> I 
have realised once and for all that I am neither object nor subject and I do 
not need to remind myself all the time.

**Q:**&ensp;I find it hard to grasp what exactly you mean by saying that you 
are neither the object nor the subject. At this very moment, as we talk, am I 
not the object of your experience, and you the subject?

**M:**&ensp;Look — my thumb touches my forefinger. Both touch and are touched. 
When my attention is on the thumb, the thumb is the feeler and the forefinger 
— the self. Shift the focus of attention and the relationship is reversed. I 
find that somehow, by shifting the focus of attention, I become the very thing 
I look at and experience the kind of consciousness it has; I become the inner 
witness of the thing. I call this capacity of entering other focal points of 
consciousness “love”; you may give it any name you like. Love says, “I am 
everything”. Wisdom says, “I am nothing”. Between the two my life flows. Since 
at any point of time and space I can be both the subject and the object of 
experience, I express it by saying that I am both, and neither, and beyond 
both.

**Q:**&ensp;You make all these extraordinary statements about yourself. What 
makes you say those things? What do you mean by saying that you are beyond 
space and time?

**M:**&ensp;You ask and the answer comes. I watch myself — I watch the answer 
and see no contradiction. It is clear to me that I am telling you the truth. 
It is all very simple. Only you must trust that I mean what I say, that I am 
quite serious. As I told you already, my *guru* showed me my true nature — and 
the true nature of the world. Having realised that I am one with and yet 
beyond the world, I became free from all desire and fear. I did not reason out 
that I should be free. I found myself free — unexpectedly, without the least 
effort. This freedom from desire and fear has remained with me since then. 
Another thing I noticed was that I do not need to make an effort; the deed 
follows the thought without delay and friction. I have also found that 
thoughts become self-fulfilling; things would fall in place smoothly and 
rightly. The main change was in the mind; it became motionless and silent, 
responding quickly, but not perpetuating the response. Spontaneity became a 
way of life, the real became natural and the natural became real. And above 
all, infinite affection, love, dark and quiet, radiating in all directions, 
embracing all, making all interesting and beautiful, significant and 
auspicious.

**Q:**&ensp;We are told that various <span data-tippy-content="One who 
practices <em>yoga</em>.">yogi</span>c powers arise spontaneously in a man who 
has realised his own true being. What is your experience in these matters?

**M:**&ensp;Man’s fivefold body (physical and so forth) has potential powers 
beyond our wildest dreams. Not only is the entire universe reflected in man, 
but also the power to control the universe is waiting to be used by him. The 
wise man is not anxious to use such powers except when the situation calls for 
them. He finds the abilities and skills of the human personality quite 
adequate for the business of daily living. Some of the powers can be developed 
by specialised training, but the man who flaunts such powers is still in 
bondage. The wise man counts nothing as his own. When at some time and place 
some miracle is attributed to some person, he will not establish any causal 
link between events and people, nor will he allow any conclusions to be drawn. 
All happened as it happened because it had to happen; everything happens as it 
does because the universe is as it is.

**Q:**&ensp;The universe does not seem a happy place to live in. Why is there 
so much suffering?

**M:**&ensp;Pain is physical; suffering is mental. Beyond the mind there is no 
suffering. Pain is merely a signal that the body is in danger and requires 
attention. Similarly, suffering warns us that the structure of memories and 
habits, which we call the person (<span data-tippy-content="Person, the outer 
self.">vyakti</span>), is threatened by loss or change. Pain is essential for 
the survival of the body, but none compels you to suffer. Suffering is due 
entirely to clinging or resisting; it is a sign of our unwillingness to move 
on, to flow with life. 

As a sane life is free of pain, so is a saintly life free from suffering.

**Q:**&ensp;Nobody has suffered more than saints.

**M:**&ensp;Did they tell you, or do you say so on your own? The essence of 
saintliness is total acceptance of the present moment, harmony with things as 
they happen. A saint does not want things to be different from what they are; 
he knows that, considering all factors, they are unavoidable. He is friendly 
with the inevitable and, therefore, does not suffer. Pain he may know, but it 
does not shatter him. If he can, he does the needful to restore the lost 
balance — or he lets things take their course.

**Q:**&ensp;He may die.

**M:**&ensp;So what? What does he gain by living on and what does he lose by 
dying? What was born must die; what was never born cannot die. It all depends 
on what he takes himself to be.

**Q:**&ensp;Imagine you fall mortally ill. Would you not regret and resent?

**M:**&ensp;But I am dead already or, rather, neither alive nor dead. You see 
my body behaving the habitual way and draw your own conclusions. You will not 
admit that your conclusions bind nobody but you. Do see that the image you 
have of me may be altogether wrong? Your image of yourself is wrong too, but 
that is your problem. But you need not create problems for me and then ask me 
to solve them. I am neither creating problems nor solving them.


<script>
export default {
  props: ["slot-key"],
  mounted () {
    tippy("[data-tippy-content]", {allowHTML: true});
  }
}
</script>

