# 72. What is Pure, Unalloyed, Unattached Is Real

>What is pure, unalloyed, unattached is real. What is tainted, mixed up, 
dependent and transient is unreal. … The ‘I am’ that pursues the pleasant and 
shuns the unpleasant is false; the ‘I am’ that sees pleasure and pain as 
inseparable sees rightly.

**Maharaj:**&ensp;You are back in India! Where have you been, what have you 
seen?

**Questioner:**&ensp;I come from Switzerland. I stayed there with a remarkable 
man who claims to have realised. He has done many <span 
data-tippy-content="One of the six systems of the Hindu philosophy 
(from <em>yoj</em>, to yoke or join). <em>Yoga</em> teaches the means by which 
the individual spirit (<em>jivatma</em>) can be joined or united with the 
universal spirit (<em>Paramatma</em>).">yoga</span>s in his past and had many 
experiences that passed away. Now he claims no special abilities or knowledge 
— the only unusual thing about him is connected with sensations: he is unable 
to separate the seer from the seen. For instance, when he sees a car rushing 
at him, he does not know whether the car is rushing at him, or he at the car. 
He seems to be the seer and the seen, both at the same time. They become one. 
Whatever he sees, he sees himself. When I asked him some *Vedant*ic questions 
he said, “I really cannot answer. I do not know. All I know is this strange 
identity with whatever I perceive. You know, I expected anything but this”. 

He is, on the whole, a humble man; he makes no disciples and in no way puts 
himself on a pedestal. He is willing to talk about his strange condition, but 
that is all.

**M:**&ensp;Now he knows what he knows. All else is over. At least he still 
talks. Soon he may cease talking.

**Q:**&ensp;What will he do then?

**M:**&ensp;Immobility and silence are not inactive. The flower fills the 
space with perfume, the candle — with light. They do nothing yet they change 
everything by their mere presence. You can photograph the candle, but not its 
light. You can know the man, his name and appearance, but not his influence. 
His very presence is action.

**Q:**&ensp;Is it not natural to be active?

**M:**&ensp;Everybody wants to be active, but where do his actions originate? 
There is no central point — each action begets another, meaninglessly and 
painfully in endless succession. The alternation of work and pause is not 
there. First find the immutable centre where all movement is born. Just like a 
wheel turns around an axle, so must you be always at the axle in the centre 
and not whirling at the periphery.

**Q:**&ensp;How do I go about it in practice?

**M:**&ensp;Whenever a thought or emotion of desire or fear comes to your 
mind, just turn away from it.

**Q:**&ensp;By suppressing my thoughts and feelings I shall provoke a reäction.

**M:**&ensp;I am not talking of suppression. Just refuse attention.

**Q:**&ensp;Must I not use effort to arrest the movements of the mind?

**M:**&ensp;It has nothing to do with effort. Just turn away — look between 
the thoughts rather than at the thoughts. When you happen to walk in a crowd, 
you do not fight every man you meet — you just find your way between.

**Q:**&ensp;If I use my will to control the mind, it only strengthens the ego.

**M:**&ensp;Of course. When you fight, you invite a fight. But when you do not 
resist, you meet with no resistance. When you refuse to play the game, you are 
out of it.

**Q:**&ensp;How long will it take me to get free of the mind?

**M:**&ensp;It may take a thousand years, but really no time is required. All 
you need is to be in dead earnest. Here the will is the deed. If you are 
sincere, you have it. After all, it is a matter of attitude. Nothing stops you 
from being a <span data-tippy-content="The knower, especially of the higher 
knowledge derived from meditation; “closely related to the knowledge of 
Brahman”.">jnani</span> here and now except fear. You are afraid of being 
impersonal, of impersonal being. It is all quite simple. Turn away from your 
desires and fears and from the thoughts they create and you are at once in 
your natural state.

**Q:**&ensp;No question of reconditioning, changing or eliminating the mind?

**M:**&ensp;Absolutely none. Leave your mind alone, that is all. Don’t go 
along with it. After all there is no such thing as mind apart from thoughts 
which come and go obeying their own laws, not yours. They dominate you only 
because you are interested in them. It is exactly as Christ said, “Resist not 
evil”. By resisting evil you merely strengthen it.

**Q:**&ensp;Yes, I see now. All I must do is to deny existence to evil. Then 
it fades away. But does it not boil down to some kind of auto-suggestion?

**M:**&ensp;The auto-suggestion is in full swing *now* when you think yourself 
to be a person, caught between good and evil. What I am asking you to do is to 
put an end to it; to wake up and see things as they are. 

About your stay in Switzerland with that strange friend of yours: what did you 
gain in his company?

**Q:**&ensp;Nothing absolutely. His experience did not affect me at all. One 
thing I have understood: there is nothing to search for. Wherever I may go, 
nothing waits for me at the end of the journey. Discovery is not the result 
of transportation.

**M:**&ensp;Yes, you are quite apart from anything that can be gained or lost.

**Q:**&ensp;Do you call it <span data-tippy-content="Dispassion, indifference 
to the pains and pleasures of the material world.">vairagya</span>, 
relinquishment, renunciation?

**M:**&ensp;There is nothing to renounce. Enough if you stop acquiring. To 
give you must have, and to have you must take. Better not to take. It is 
simpler than to practice renunciation, which leads to a dangerous form of 
‘spiritual’ pride. 

All this weighing, selecting, choosing, exchanging — it is all shopping in 
some ‘spiritual’ market. What is your business there? What deal are you out to 
strike? When you are not out for business, what is the use of this endless 
anxiety of choice? Restlessness takes you nowhere. Something prevents you from 
seeing that there is nothing you need. Find it out and see its falseness. It 
is like having swallowed some poison and suffering from unquenchable craving 
for water. Instead of drinking beyond all measure, why not eliminate the 
poison and be free of this burning thirst?

**Q:**&ensp;I shall have to eliminate the ego!

**M:**&ensp;The sense ‘I am a person in time and space’ is the poison. In a 
way, time itself is the poison. In time, all things come to an end and new 
ones are born to be devoured in their turn. Do not identify yourself with 
time; do not ask anxiously, “what next, what next?”. Step out of time and see 
it devour the world. Say, “Well, it is in the nature of time to put an end to 
everything. Let it be. It does not concern me. I am not combustible, nor do I 
need to collect fuel”.

**Q:**&ensp;Can the witness be without the things to witness?

**M:**&ensp;There is always something to witness. If not a thing, then its 
absence. Witnessing is natural and is no problem. The problem is excessive 
interest, leading to self-identification. Whatever you are engrossed in, you 
take to be real.

**Q:**&ensp;Is the ‘I am’ real or unreal? Is the ‘I am’ the witness? Is the 
witness real or unreal?

**M:**&ensp;What is pure, unalloyed, unattached is real. What is tainted, 
mixed up, dependent and transient is unreal. Do not be misled by words — one 
word may convey several and even contradictory meanings. The ‘I am’ that 
pursues the pleasant and shuns the unpleasant is false; the ‘I am’ that sees 
pleasure and pain as inseparable sees rightly. The witness that is enmeshed in 
what he perceives is the person; the witness who stands aloof, unmoved and 
untouched — is the watch-tower of the real — the point at which awareness, 
inherent in the unmanifested, contacts the manifested. There can be no 
universe without the witness: there can be no witness without the universe.

**Q:**&ensp;Time consumes the world. Who is the witness of time?

**M:**&ensp;He who is beyond time — the Unnameable. A glowing ember, moved 
round and round quickly enough, appears as a glowing circle. When the movement 
ceases, the ember remains. Similarly, the ‘I am’ in movement creates the 
world. The ‘I am’ at peace becomes the Absolute. You are like a man with an 
electric torch walking through a gallery. You can see only what is within the 
beam. The rest is in darkness.

**Q:**&ensp;If I project the world, I should be able to change it.

**M:**&ensp;Of course you can. But you must cease identifying yourself with it 
and go beyond. Then you have the power to destroy and recreate.

**Q:**&ensp;All I want is to be free.

**M:**&ensp;You must know two things: What are you to be free from and what 
keeps you bound.

**Q:**&ensp;Why do you want to annihilate the universe?

**M:**&ensp;I am not concerned with the universe. Let it be or not be. It is 
enough if I know myself.

**Q:**&ensp;If you are beyond the world, then you are of no use to the world.

**M:**&ensp;Pity the self that is, not the world that is not! Engrossed in a 
dream, you have forgotten your true self.

**Q:**&ensp;Without the world there is no place for love.

**M:**&ensp;Quite so. All these attributes — being, consciousness, love and 
beauty — are reflections of the real in the world. No real — no reflection.

**Q:**&ensp;The world is full of desirable things and people. How can I 
imagine it non-existent?

**M:**&ensp;Leave the desirables to those who desire. Change the current of 
your desire from taking to giving. The passion for giving, for sharing, will 
naturally wash the idea of an external world out of your mind, and the idea of 
giving as well. Only the pure radiance of love, beyond giving and receiving, 
will remain.

**Q:**&ensp;In love there must be duality; the lover and the beloved.

**M:**&ensp;In love there is not even the one — how can there be two? Love is 
the refusal to separate, to make distinctions. Before you can think of unity, 
you must first create duality. When you truly love, you do not say, “I love 
you”. Where there is ment activity, there is duality.

**Q:**&ensp;What is it that brings me again and again to India? It cannot only 
be the comparative cheapness of life here, nor the colourfulness and variety 
of impressions. There must be some more important factor.

**M:**&ensp;There is also the spiritual aspect. The division between the outer 
and the inner is less in India. It is easier here to express the inner in the 
outer. Integration is easier. Society is not so oppressive.

**Q:**&ensp;Yes, in the West it is all <span data-tippy-content="Darkness, 
inertia, passivity. One of the three constituents (<em>guna</em>s) of the 
cosmic substance: <em>sattva</em>, <em>rajas</em> and 
<em>tamas</em>.">tamas</span> and <span data-tippy-content="Motivity, 
activity, energy. One of the three <em>guna</em>s or qualities of matter: 
<em>sattva</em>, <em>rajas</em> and <em>tamas</em>. In <em>yoga</em>, 
egoism.">rajas</span>. In India there is more of <span 
data-tippy-content="Being, existence, true essence. In <em>yoga</em> the 
quality of purity or goodness.">sattva</span>, of harmony and balance.

**M:**&ensp;Can’t you go beyond the <span data-tippy-content="Attributes, 
qualities. In <em>Samkhya</em> philosophy the three attributes of the cosmic 
substance (<em>prakriti</em>) are: illuminating (<em>sattva</em>), activating 
(<em>rajas</em>) and restraining (<em>tamas</em>).">guna</span>s? Why choose 
the *sattva*? Be what you are, wherever you are and worry not about *guna*s.

**Q:**&ensp;I have not the strength.

**M:**&ensp;It merely shows that you have gained little in India. What you 
truly have you cannot lose. Were you well-grounded in your self, the change 
of place would not affect it.

**Q:**&ensp;In India, spiritual life is easy. It is not so in the West. One 
has to conform to environment to a much greater extent.

**M:**&ensp;Why don’t you create your own environment? The world has only as 
much power over you as you give it. Rebel. Go beyond duality, make no 
difference between East and West.

**Q:**&ensp;What can one do when one finds oneself in a very nonspiritual 
environment?

**M:**&ensp;Do nothing. Be yourself. Stay out. Look beyond.

**Q:**&ensp;There may be clashes at home. Parents rarely understand.

**M:**&ensp;When you know your true being, you have no problems. You may 
please your parents or not, marry or not, make a lot of money or not; it is 
all the same to you. Just act according to circumstances, yet in close touch 
with the facts, with the reality in every situation.

**Q:**&ensp;Is it not a very high state?

**M:**&ensp;Oh no — it is the normal state. You call it high because you are 
afraid of it. First be free from fear. See that there is nothing to be afraid 
of. Fearlessness is the door to the Supreme.

**Q:**&ensp;No amount of effort can make me fearless.

**M:**&ensp;Fearlessness comes by itself when you see that there is nothing to 
be afraid of. When you walk on a crowded street, you just bypass people. Some 
you see, some you just glance at, but you do not stop. It is the stopping that 
creates the bottleneck. Keep moving! Disregard names and shapes, don’t be 
attached to them; your attachment is your bondage.

**Q:**&ensp;What should I do when a man slaps me on my face?

**M:**&ensp;You will reäct according to your character, inborn or acquired.

**Q:**&ensp;Is it inevitable? Am I, and is the world, condemned to remain as 
we are?

**M:**&ensp;A jeweller who wants to refashion an ornament first melts it down 
to shapeless gold. Similarly, one must return to one’s original state before a 
new name and form can emerge. Death is essential for renewal.

**Q:**&ensp;You are always stressing the need of going beyond, of aloofness, 
of solitude. You hardly ever use the words ‘right’ and ‘wrong’. Why?

**M:**&ensp;It is right to be oneself, it is wrong not to be. All else is 
conditional. You are eager to separate right from wrong because you need some 
basis for action. You are always after doing something or other. But 
personally motivated action based on some scale of values, aiming at some 
result, is worse than inaction, for its fruits are always bitter.

**Q:**&ensp;Are awareness and love one and the same?

**M:**&ensp;Of course. Awareness is dynamic, love is being. Awareness is love 
in action. By itself the mind can actualise any number of possibilities, but 
unless they are prompted by love, they are valueless. Love precedes creation. 
Without it there is only chaos.

**Q:**&ensp;Where is the action in awareness?

**M:**&ensp;You are so incurably operational! Unless there is movement, 
restlessness, turmoil, you do not call it action. Chaos is movement for 
movement’s sake. True action does not displace; it transforms. A change of 
place is mere transportation; a change of heart is action. Just remember: 
nothing perceivable is real. Activity is not action. Action is hidden, 
unknown, unknowable. You can only know the fruit.

**Q:**&ensp;Is not God the all-doer?

**M:**&ensp;Why do you bring in an outer doer? The world recreates itself out 
of itself. It is an endless process, the transitory begetting the transitory. 
It is your ego that makes you think that there must be a doer. You create a 
God in your own image, however dismal the image. Through the film of your mind 
you project a world and also a God to give it cause and purpose. It is all 
imagination — step out of it.

**Q:**&ensp;How difficult it is to see the world as purely mental! The 
tangible reality of it seems so very convincing.

**M:**&ensp;This is the mystery of imagination, that it seems to be so real. 
You may be celibate or married, a monk or a family man; that is not the point. 
Are you a slave of your imagination or are you not? Whatever decision you 
take, whatever work you do, it will be invariably based on imagination, on 
assumptions parading as facts.

**Q:**&ensp;Here I am sitting in front of you. What part of it is imagination?

**M:**&ensp;The whole of it. Even space and time are imagined.

**Q:**&ensp;Does it mean that I don’t exist?

**M:**&ensp;I too do not exist. All existence is imaginary.

**Q:**&ensp;Is *being*, too, imaginary?

**M:**&ensp;Pure being, filling all and beyond all, is not existence which is 
limited. All limitation is imaginary, only the unlimited is real.

**Q:**&ensp;When you look at me, what do you see?

**M:**&ensp;I see you imagining yourself to be.

**Q:**&ensp;There are many like me. Yet each is different.

**M:**&ensp;The totality of all projections is what is called <span 
data-tippy-content="The great illusion, unreality. <em>Maya</em> is the 
illusive power that veils the reality. <em>Maya</em> is the totality of all 
mental projections.">maha-maya</span>, the Great Illusion.

**Q:**&ensp;But when you look at yourself, what do you see?

**M:**&ensp;It depends how I look. When I look through the mind, I see 
numberless people. When I look beyond the mind, I see the witness. Beyond the 
witness there is the infinite intensity of emptiness and silence.

**Q:**&ensp;How should one deal with people?

**M:**&ensp;Why make plans? Such questions show anxiety. Relationship is a 
living thing. Be at peace with your inner self and you will be at peace with 
everybody. 

Realise that you are not the master of what happens — you cannot control the 
future except in purely technical matters. Human relationship cannot be 
planned, they are too rich and varied. Just be understanding and 
compassionate, free of all self-seeking.

**Q:**&ensp;Surely I am not the master of what happens, but rather its slave.

**M:**&ensp;Be neither master nor slave. Stand aloof.

**Q:**&ensp;Does it imply avoidance of action?

**M:**&ensp;You cannot avoid action. It happens like everything else.

**Q:**&ensp;My actions, surely, I can control.

**M:**&ensp;Try. You will soon see that you do what you must.

**Q:**&ensp;I can act according to my will.

**M:**&ensp;You know your will only after you have acted.

**Q:**&ensp;I remember my desires, the choices made, the decisions taken and 
act accordingly.

**M:**&ensp;Then your memory decides, not you.

**Q:**&ensp;Where do I come in?

**M:**&ensp;You make it possible by giving it attention.

**Q:**&ensp;Is there no such thing as free will? Am I not free to desire?

**M:**&ensp;Oh no, you are compelled to desire. In Hinduism the very idea of 
free will is non-existent, so there is no word for it. Will is commitment, 
fixation, bondage.

**Q:**&ensp;I am free to choose my limitations.

**M:**&ensp;You must be free first. To be free in the world you must be free 
of the world. Otherwise, your past and your future decide for you. Between 
what had happened and what must happen you are caught. Call it destiny or 
<span data-tippy-content="Action or “the fruits of action”. <em>Karma</em> is 
of three kinds: <em>sanchita</em> (accumulated from previous births), 
<em>prarabdha</em> (portion of the past <em>karma</em> to be worked out in the 
present life) and <em>agami</em> (the current <em>karma</em> the result of 
which will fructify in future).">karma</span>, but never freedom. First return 
to your true being and then act from the heart of love.

**Q:**&ensp;Within the manifested, what is the stamp of the unmanifested?

**M:**&ensp;There is none. The moment you begin to look for the stamp of the 
unmanifested, the manifested dissolves. If you try to understand the 
unmanifested with the mind, you at once go beyond the mind; it is like when 
you stir the fire with a wooden stick — you burn the stick. Use the mind to 
investigate the manifested. Be like the chick that pecks at the shell. 
Speculating about life outside the shell would have been of little use to it, 
but pecking at the shell breaks the shell from within and liberates the chick. 
Similarly, break the mind from within by investigation and exposure of its 
contradictions and absurdities.

**Q:**&ensp;The longing to break the shell — where does it come from?

**M:**&ensp;From the unmanifested.

<script>
export default {
  props: ["slot-key"],
  mounted () {
    tippy("[data-tippy-content]", {allowHTML: true});
  }
}
</script>