# 53. Desires Fulfilled Breed More Desires

>… desires fulfilled breed more desires. Keeping away from all desires and 
contentment in what comes by itself is a very fruitful state — a precondition 
to the state of fullness. Don’t distrust its apparent sterility and emptiness. 
Believe me — it is the satisfaction of desires that breeds misery. Freedom 
from desires is bliss.

**Questioner:**&ensp;I must confess I came today in a rebellious mood. I got a 
raw deal at the airlines office. When faced with such situations everything 
seems doubtful, everything seems useless.

**Maharaj:**&ensp;This is a very useful mood. Doubting all, refusing all, 
unwilling to learn through another. It is the fruit of your long <span 
data-tippy-content="The practice which produces success, 
<em>siddhi</em>.">sadhana</span>. After all, one does not study for ever.

**Q:**&ensp;Enough of it. It took me nowhere.

**M:**&ensp;Don’t say, “nowhere”. It took you where you are — now.

**Q:**&ensp;It is again the child and its tantrums. I have not moved an inch 
from where I was.

**M:**&ensp;You began as a child and you will end as a child. Whatever you 
have acquired in the meantime, you must lose and start at the beginning.

**Q:**&ensp;But the child kicks. When it is unhappy or denied anything, it 
kicks.

**M:**&ensp;Let it kick. Just look at the kicking. And if you are too afraid 
of society to kick convincingly, look at that too. I know it is a painful 
business. But there is no remedy — except one: the search for remedies must 
cease. 

If you are angry or in pain, separate yourself from anger and pain and watch 
them. Externalisation is the first step to liberation. Step away and look. The 
physical events will go on happening, but by themselves they have no 
importance. It is the mind alone that matters. Whatever happens, you cannot 
kick and scream in an airline office or in a bank. Society does not allow it. 
If you do not like their ways or are not prepared to endure them, don’t fly or 
carry money. Walk, and if you cannot walk, don’t travel. If you deal with 
society, you must accept its ways, for its ways are your ways. Your needs and 
demands have created them. Your desires are so complex and contradictory — no 
wonder the society you create is also complex and contradictory.

**Q:**&ensp;I do see and admit that the outer chaos is merely a reflection of 
my own inner disharmony. But what is the remedy?

**M:**&ensp;Don’t seek remedies.

**Q:**&ensp;Sometimes one is in a ‘state of grace’ and life is happy and 
harmonious. But such a state does not last! The mood changes and all goes wrong.

**M:**&ensp;If you could only keep quiet, clear of memories and expectations, 
you would be able to discern the beautiful pattern of events. It is your 
restlessness that causes chaos.

**Q:**&ensp;For the full three hours that I spent in the airline office, I was 
practising patience and forbearance. It did not speed up matters.

**M:**&ensp;At least it did not slow them down, as your kicking would have 
surely done! You want immediate results! We do not dispense magic here. 
Everybody makes the same mistake: refusing the means, but wanting the ends. 
You want peace and harmony in the world, but refuse to have them in yourself. 
Follow my advice implicitly and you will not be disappointed. I cannot solve 
your problem by mere words. You have to act on what I told you and persevere. 
It is not the right advice that liberates, but the action based on it. Just 
like a doctor who, after giving the patient an injection, tells him, “Now, 
keep quiet. Do nothing more, just keep quiet”. I am telling you, you have got 
your ‘injection’, now keep quiet, just keep quiet. You have nothing else to 
do. My <span data-tippy-content="Spiritual teacher, preceptor.">guru</span> 
did the same. He would tell me something and then say, “Now keep quiet. Don’t 
go on ruminating all the time. Stop. Be silent”.

**Q:**&ensp;I can keep quiet for an hour in the morning. But the day is long 
and many things happen that throw me out of balance. It is easy to say, “be 
silent”, but to be silent when all is screaming in me and around me — please 
tell me how it is done.

**M:**&ensp;All that needs doing can be done in peace and silence. There is no 
need to get upset.

**Q:**&ensp;It is all theory which does not fit the facts. I am returning to 
Europe with nothing to do there. My life is completely empty.

**M:**&ensp;If you just try to keep quiet, all will come — the work, the 
strength for work, the right motive. Must you know everything beforehand? 
Don’t be anxious about your future — be quiet now and all will fall into 
place. The unexpected is bound to happen, while the anticipated may never 
come. Don’t tell me you cannot control your nature. You need not control it. 
Throw it overboard. Have no nature to fight or to submit to. No experience 
will hurt you, provided you don’t make it into a habit. Of the entire 
universe, you are the subtle cause. All is because you are. Grasp this point 
firmly and deeply and dwell on it repeatedly. To realise this as absolutely 
true is liberation.

**Q:**&ensp;If I am the seed of my universe, then a rotten seed I am! By the 
fruit the seed is known.

**M:**&ensp;What is wrong with your world that you swear at it?

**Q:**&ensp;It is full of pain.

**M:**&ensp;Nature is neither pleasant nor painful. It is all intelligence and 
beauty. Pain and pleasure are in the mind. Change your scale of values and all 
will change. Pleasure and pain are mere disturbances of the senses; treat them 
equally and there will be only bliss. And the world is what you make it; by 
all means make it happy. Only contentment can make you happy — desires 
fulfilled breed more desires. Keeping away from all desires and contentment in 
what comes by itself is a very fruitful state — a precondition to the state of 
fullness. Don’t distrust its apparent sterility and emptiness. Believe me — it 
is the satisfaction of desires that breeds misery. Freedom from desires is bliss.

**Q:**&ensp;There are things that we need.

**M:**&ensp;What you need will come to you if you do not ask for what you do 
not need. Yet only few people reach this state of complete dispassion and 
detachment. It is a very high state, the very threshold of liberation.

**Q:**&ensp;I have been barren for the last two years — desolate and empty and 
often was I praying for death to come.

**M:**&ensp;Well, with your coming here, events have started rolling. Let 
things happen as they happen — they will sort themselves out nicely in the 
end. You need not strain towards the future — the future will come to you on 
its own. For some time longer you will remain sleep-walking as you do now, 
bereft of meaning and assurance; but this period will end and you will find 
your work both fruitful and easy. There are always moments when one feels 
empty and estranged. Such moments are most desirable, for it means the soul 
had cast its moorings and is sailing for distant places. This is detachment — 
when the old is over and the new has not yet come. If you are afraid, the 
state may be distressing, but there is really nothing to be afraid of. 
Remember the instruction: whatever you come across — go beyond.

**Q:**&ensp;The Buddha’s rule: to remember what needs to be remembered. But I 
find it so difficult to remember the right thing at the right moment. With me 
forgetting seems to be the rule!

**M:**&ensp;It is not easy to remember when every situation brings up a storm 
of desires and fears. Craving born of memory is also the destroyer of memory.

**Q:**&ensp;How am I to fight desire? There is nothing stronger.

**M:**&ensp;The waters of life are thundering over the rocks of objects — 
desirable or hateful. Remove the rocks by insight and detachment and the same 
waters will flow deep, and silent and swift, in greater volume and with 
greater power. Don’t be theoretical about it; give time to thought and 
consideration. If you desire to be free, do not neglect the nearest step to 
freedom. It is like climbing a mountain — not a step can be missed. One step 
less — and the summit is not reached.


<script>
export default {
  props: ["slot-key"],
  mounted () {
    tippy("[data-tippy-content]", {allowHTML: true});
  }
}
</script>