# 77. “I” and ’Mine’ are False Ideas

>… “I” and the “mine” are false ideas, having no foundation in reality. Created 
by the mind, they rule their creator as long as he takes them to be true; when 
questioned, they dissolve.

**Questioner:**&ensp;I am very much attached to my family and possessions. How 
can I conquer this attachment?

**Maharaj:**&ensp;This attachment is born along with the sense of “me” and 
“mine”. Find the true meaning of these words and you will be free of all 
bondage. You have a mind which is spread in time. One after another all things 
happen to you and the memory remains. There is nothing wrong with it. The 
problem arises only when the memory of past pains and pleasures — which are 
essential to all organic life — remains as a reflex, dominating behaviour. 
This reflex takes the shape of “I” and uses the body and the mind for its 
purposes, which are invariably in search for pleasure or flight from pain. 
When you recognise the “I” as it is, a bundle of desires and fears, and the 
sense of “mine”, as embracing all things and people needed for the purpose of 
avoiding pain and securing pleasure, you will see that the “I” and the ’mine’ 
are false ideas, having no foundation in reality. Created by the mind, they 
rule their creator as long as he takes them to be true; when questioned, they 
dissolve. 

The ’I’ and ’mine’ having no existence in themselves, need a support which 
they find in the body. The body becomes their point of reference. When you 
talk of “my” husband and “my” children, you mean the body’s husband and the 
body’s children. Give up the idea of being the body and face the question, 
“Who am I?”. At once a process will be set in motion which will bring back 
reality or, rather, will take the mind to reality. Only you must not be afraid.

**Q:**&ensp;What am I to be afraid of?

**M:**&ensp;For reality to be, the ideas of “me” and “mine” must go. They will 
go if you let them. Then your normal, natural state reäppears, in which you 
are neither the body nor the mind, neither the “me” nor the “mine”, but in a 
different state of being altogether. It is pure awareness of being, without 
being this or that, without any self-identification with anything in 
particular or in general. In that pure light of consciousness there is 
nothing, not even the idea of nothing. There is only light.

**Q:**&ensp;There are people whom I love. Must I give them up?

**M:**&ensp;You only let go of your hold on them. The rest is up to them. They 
may lose interest in you or not.

**Q:**&ensp;How could they? Are they not my own?

**M:**&ensp;They are your body’s, not your own. Or, better, there is no one 
who is not your own.

**Q:**&ensp;And what about my possessions?

**M:**&ensp;When the “mine” is no more, where are your possessions?

**Q:**&ensp;Please tell me — must I lose all by losing the “I”?

**M:**&ensp;You may or you may not. It will be all the same to you. Your loss 
will be somebody’s gain. You will not mind.

**Q:**&ensp;If I do not mind, I shall lose all!

**M:**&ensp;Once you have nothing, you have no problems.

**Q:**&ensp;I am left with the problem of survival.

**M:**&ensp;It is the body’s problem and it will solve it by eating, drinking 
and sleeping. There is enough for all, provided all share.

**Q:**&ensp;Our society is based on grabbing, not on sharing.

**M:**&ensp;By sharing you will change it.

**Q:**&ensp;I do not feel like sharing. Moreöver, I am being taxed out of my 
possessions.

**M:**&ensp;This is not the same as voluntary sharing. Society will not change 
by compulsion. It requires a change of heart. Understand that nothing is your 
own, that all belongs to all. Only then society will change.

**Q:**&ensp;One man’s understanding will not take the world far.

**M:**&ensp;The world in which you live will be affected deeply. It will be a 
healthy and happy world which will radiate and communicate, increase and 
spread. The power of a true heart is immense.

**Q:**&ensp;Please tell us more.

**M:**&ensp;Talking is not my hobby. Sometimes I talk, sometimes I do not. My 
talking or not talking is a part of a given situation and does not depend on 
me. Where there is a situation in which I have to talk, I hear myself talking. 
In some other situation I may not hear myself talking. It is all the same to 
me. Whether I talk or not, the light and love of being what I am are not 
affected, nor are they under my control. They are, and I know they are. There 
is a glad awareness, but nobody who is glad. Of course, there is a sense of 
identity, but it is the identity of a memory track, like the identity of a 
sequence of pictures on the ever-present screen. Without the light and the 
screen there can be no picture. To know the picture as the play of light on 
the screen gives freedom from the idea that the picture is real. All you have 
to do is to understand that you love the self and the self loves you and that 
the sense “I Am” is the link between you both, a token of identity in spite of 
apparent diversity. Look at the “I Am” as a sign of love between the inner and 
the outer, the real and the appearance. Just like in a dream all is different 
except the sense of “I”, which enables you to say, “I dreamt”, so does the 
sense of “I Am” enable you to say, “I am my real Self again”. I do nothing, 
nor is anything done to me. I am what I am and nothing can affect me. I appear 
to depend on everything, but in fact all depends on me.

**Q:**&ensp;How can you say you do nothing? Are you not talking to me?

**M:**&ensp;I do not have the feeling that I am talking. There is talking 
going on, that is all.

**Q:**&ensp;I talk.

**M:**&ensp;Do you? You hear yourself talking and you say, “I talk”.

**Q:**&ensp;Everybody says, “I work”, “I come”, “I go”.

**M:**&ensp;I have no objection to the conventions of your language, but they 
distort and destroy reality. A more accurate way of saying would have been, 
“There is talking, working, coming, going”. For anything to happen, the entire 
universe must coïncide. It is wrong to believe that anything in particular can 
cause an event. Every cause is universal. Your very body would not exist 
without the entire universe contributing to its creation and survival. I am 
fully aware that things happen as they happen because the world is as it is. 
To affect the course of events I must bring a new factor into the world and 
the factor can only be myself, the power of love and understanding focussed in 
me. 

When the body is born, all kinds of things happen to it, and you take part in 
them because you take yourself to be the body. You are like the man in the 
cinema house, laughing and crying with the picture though knowing full well 
that he is in his seat the whole time and the picture is but the play of 
light. It is enough to shift attention from the screen to oneself to break the 
spell. When the body dies, the kind of life you live now — a succession of 
physical and mental events — comes to an end. It can end even now without 
waiting for the death of the body — it is enough to shift attention to the 
Self and keep it there. All happens as if there is a mysterious power that 
creates and moves everything. Realise that you are not the mover, only the 
observer, and you will be at peace.

**Q:**&ensp;Is that power separate from me?

**M:**&ensp;Of course not. But you must begin by being the dispassionate 
observer. Then only will you realise your full being as the universal lover 
and actor. As long as you are enmeshed in the tribulations of a particular 
personality, you can see nothing beyond it. But ultimately you will come to 
see that you are neither the particular nor the universal; you are beyond 
both. As the tiny point of a pencil can draw innumerable pictures, so does the 
dimensionless point of awareness draw the contents of the vast universe. Find 
that point and be free.

**Q:**&ensp;Out of what do I create this world?

**M:**&ensp;Out of your own memories. As long as you are ignorant of yourself 
as the creator, your world is limited and repetitive. Once you go beyond your 
self-identification with your past, you are free to create a new world of 
harmony and beauty. Or you just remain — beyond being and non-being.

**Q:**&ensp;What will remain with me if I let go my memories?

**M:**&ensp;Nothing will remain.

**Q:**&ensp;I am afraid.

**M:**&ensp;You will be afraid until you experience freedom and its blessings. 
Of course, some memories are needed to identify and guide the body. Such 
memories do remain, but there is no attachment left to the body as such; it is 
no longer the ground for desire or fear. All this is not very difficult to 
understand and practice, but you must be interested. Without interest, nothing 
can be done. 

Having seen that you are a bundle of memories held together by attachment, 
step out and look from the outside. You may perceive for the first time 
something which is not memory. You cease to be a Mr. So-and-so, busy about his 
own affairs. You are at last at peace. You realise that nothing was ever wrong 
with the world — you alone were wrong and now it is all over. Never again will 
you be caught in the meshes of desire born of ignorance.