# 89. Progress in Spiritual Life

>[Signs of progress in spiritual life are]: Freedom from all anxiety, a sense 
of ease and joy, deep peace within and abundant energy without.

**Questioner:**&ensp;We are two girls from England visiting India. We know 
little about <span data-tippy-content="One of the six systems of the Hindu 
philosophy (from <em>yoj</em>, to yoke or join). <em>Yoga</em> teaches the 
means by which the individual spirit (<em>jivatma</em>) can be joined or 
united with the universal spirit (<em>Paramatma</em>).">yoga</span> and we are 
here because we were told that spiritual teachers play an important role in 
Indian life.

**Maharaj:**&ensp;You are welcome. There is nothing new you will find here. 
The work we are doing is timeless. It was the same ten thousand years ago and 
will be the same ten thousand years hence. Centuries roll on, but the human 
problem does not change — the problem of suffering and the ending of suffering.

**Q:**&ensp;The other day, seven young foreigners turned up asking for a place 
to sleep for a few nights. They came to see their <span 
data-tippy-content="Spiritual teacher, preceptor.">guru</span> who was 
lecturing in Bombay. I met him — a very pleasant looking young man is he — 
apparently very matter-of-fact and efficient, but with an atmosphere of peace 
and silence about him. His teaching is traditional, with stress on <span 
data-tippy-content="Action or “the fruits of action”. <em>Karma</em> is of 
three kinds: <em>sanchita</em> (accumulated from previous births), 
<em>prarabdha</em> (portion of the past <em>karma</em> to be worked out in the 
present life) and <em>agami</em> (the current <em>karma</em> the result of 
which will fructify in future).">karma</span>-*yoga*, selfless work, service 
of the *guru* and so forth. Like the *[Bhagavad] Gita*, he says that selfless 
work will result in salvation. He is full of ambitious plans — training 
workers who will start spiritual centres in many countries. It seems he gives 
them not only the authority, but also the power to do the work in his name.

**M:**&ensp;Yes, there is such a thing as transmission of power.

**Q:**&ensp;When I was with them, I had a strange feeling of becoming invisible. The devotees, in their surrender to their *guru*, surrendered me also! Whatever I did for them was their *guru*’s doing and I was not considered, except as a mere instrument. I was merely a tap to turn left or right. There was no personal relationship whatsoëver. They tried a little to convert me to their faith; as soon as they felt resistance, they just dropped me from the field of their attention. Even between themselves they did not appear very much related; it is their common interest in their *guru* that kept them together. I found it rather cold, almost inhuman. To consider oneself an instrument in God’s hands is one thing; to be denied all attention and consideration because “all is God” may lead to indifference verging on cruelty. After all, all wars are made “in the name of God”. The entire history of mankind is a succession of “holy wars”. One is never so impersonal as in war!

**M:**&ensp;To insist, to resist, are contained in the will to *be*. Remove 
the will to *be* and what remains? Existence and non-existence relate to 
something in space and time — here and now, there and then, which again are in 
the mind. The mind plays a guessing game; it is ever uncertain, anxiety-ridden 
and restless. You resent being treated as a mere instrument of some god or 
*guru*, and insist on being treated as a person because you are not sure of 
your own existence and do not want to give up the comfort and assurance of a 
personality. You may not be what you believe yourself to be, but it gives you 
continuity, your future flows into the present and becomes the past without 
jolts. To be denied personal existence is frightening, but you must face it 
and find your identity with the totality of life. Then the problem of who is 
used by whom is no more.

**Q:**&ensp;All the attention I received was an attempt to convert me to their 
faith. When I resisted, they lost all interest in me.

**M:**&ensp;One does not become a disciple by conversion or by accident. There 
is usually an ancient link, maintained through many lives and flowering as 
love and trust, without which there is no discipleship.

**Q:**&ensp;What made you decide to become a teacher?

**M:**&ensp;I was made into one by being called so. Who am I to teach and 
whom? What I am, you are, and what you are — I am. The “I Am” is common to us 
all; beyond the “I Am” there is the immensity of light and love. We do not see 
it because we look elsewhere; I can only point at the sky; seeing the star is 
your own work. Some take more time before they see the star, some take less; 
it depends on the clarity of their vision and their earnestness in searching. 
These two must be their own — I can only encourage.

**Q:**&ensp;What am I expected to do when I become a disciple?

**M:**&ensp;Each teacher has his own method, usually patterned on his *guru*’s 
teachings and on the way he himself has realised, and his own terminology as 
well. Within that framework, adjustments to the personality of the disciple 
are made. The disciple is given full freedom of thought and inquiry and 
encouraged to question to his heart’s content. He must be absolutely certain 
of the standing and competence of his *guru*; otherwise, his faith will not be 
absolute nor his action complete. It is the absolute in you that takes you to 
the absolute beyond you — absolute truth, love and selflessness are the 
decisive factors in self-realisation. With earnestness these can be reached.

**Q:**&ensp;I understand one must give up one’s family and possessions to 
become a disciple.

**M:**&ensp;It varies with the *guru*. Some expect their mature disciples to 
become ascetics and recluses; some encourage family life and duties. Most of 
them consider a model family life more difficult than renunciation, suitable 
for a personality more mature and better balanced. In the early stages the 
discipline of monastic life may be advisable. Therefore, in the Hindu culture, 
students up to the age of twenty-five are expected to live like monks — in 
poverty, chastity and obedience — to give them a chance to build a character 
able to meet the hardships and temptations of married life.

**Q:**&ensp;Who are the people in this room? Are they your disciples?

**M:**&ensp;Ask them. It is not on the verbal level that one becomes a 
disciple, but in the silent depths of one’s being. You do not become a 
disciple by choice; it is more a matter of destiny than self-will. It does not 
matter much who the teacher is — they all wish you well. It is the disciple 
that matters — his honesty and earnestness. The right disciple will always 
find the right teacher.

**Q:**&ensp;I can see the beauty and feel the blessedness of a life devoted to 
search for truth under a competent and loving teacher. Unfortunately, we have 
to return to England.

**M:**&ensp;Distance does not matter. If your desires are strong and true, 
they will mould your life for their fulfilment. Sow your seed and leave it to 
the seasons.

**Q:**&ensp;What are the signs of progress in spiritual life?

**M:**&ensp;Freedom from anxiety; a sense of ease and joy, deep peace within 
and abundant energy without.

**Q:**&ensp;How did you get it?

**M:**&ensp;I found it all in the holy presence of my *guru* — I did nothing 
on my own. He told me to be quiet and I did it as much as I could.

**Q:**&ensp;Is your presence as powerful as his?

**M:**&ensp;How am I to know? For me, his is the only presence. If you are 
with me, you are with him.

**Q:**&ensp;Each *guru* will refer me to his own *guru*. Where is the starting 
point?

**M:**&ensp;There is a power in the universe working for enlightenment and 
liberation. We call it <span data-tippy-content="The perpetual beatitude, ever 
prosperous.">Sadashiva</span>, who is ever present in the hearts of men. It is 
the unifying factor. Unity liberates. Freedom unites. Ultimately nothing is 
mine or yours — everything is ours. Just be one with yourself and you will be 
one with all, at home in the entire universe.

**Q:**&ensp;You mean to say that all these glories will come with the mere 
dwelling on the feeling “I Am”?

**M:**&ensp;It is the simple that is certain, not the complicated. Somehow, 
people do not trust the simple, the easy, the always available. Why not give 
an honest trial to what I say? It may look very small and insignificant, but 
it is like a seed that grows into a mighty tree. Give yourself a chance!

**Q:**&ensp;I see so many people sitting here quietly. What have they come for?

**M:**&ensp;To meet themselves. At home, the world is too much for them. Here, 
nothing disturbs them; they have a chance to take leave of their daily worries 
and contact the essential in themselves.

**Q:**&ensp;What is the course of training in self-awareness?

**M:**&ensp;There is no need of training. Awareness is always with you. The 
same attention that you give to the outer, you turn to the inner. No new, or 
special kind of awareness is needed.

**Q:**&ensp;Do you help people personally?

**M:**&ensp;People do come to discuss their problems. Apparently, they derive 
some help or they would not come.

**Q:**&ensp;Are the talks with people always in public or will you talk to 
them privately also?

**M:**&ensp;It is according to their wish. Personally, I make no distinction 
between public and private.

**Q:**&ensp;Are you always available or have you other work to do?

**M:**&ensp;I am always available, but the hours in the morning and late 
afternoon are the most convenient.

**Q:**&ensp;I understand that no work ranks higher than the work of a 
spiritual teacher.

**M:**&ensp;The motive matters supremely.


<script>
export default {
  props: ["slot-key"],
  mounted () {
    tippy("[data-tippy-content]", {allowHTML: true});
  }
}
</script>
